River
A river is a natural ﬂowing watercourse, usually
freshwater, ﬂowing towards an ocean, sea, lake or
another river. In some cases a river ﬂows into the
ground and becomes dry at the end of its course
without reaching another body of water. Small rivers
can be referred to using names such as stream, creek,
brook, rivulet, and rill. There are no oﬀicial
deﬁnitions for the generic term river as applied to
geographic features,[1] although in some countries or
communities a stream is deﬁned by its size. Many
The Loboc River in Bohol,
names for small rivers are speciﬁc to geographic
Philippines
location; examples are "run" in some parts of the
United States, "burn" in Scotland and northeast
England, and "beck" in northern England. Sometimes a river is deﬁned as being
larger than a creek,[2] but not always: the language is vague.[1]
Rivers are part of the hydrological cycle. Water generally collects in a river from
precipitation through a drainage basin from surface runoﬀ and other sources such as
groundwater recharge, springs, and the release of stored water in natural ice and
snowpacks (e.g., from glaciers).
Rivers and streams are often considered major features within a landscape, however,
they actually only cover around 0.1% of the land on Earth. They are made more
obvious and signiﬁcant to humans by the fact that many human cities and
civilizations are built around the freshwater supplied by rivers and streams.[3] Most
of the major cities of the world are situated on the banks of rivers, as they are, or
were, used as a source of water, for obtaining food, for transport, as borders, as a
defensive measure, as a source of hydropower to drive machinery, for bathing, and
as a means of disposing of waste.
Potamology is the scientiﬁc study of rivers, while limnology is the study of inland
waters in general.

Contents
Topography
Subsurface streams
Permanence of ﬂow
Classiﬁcation
Topographical classiﬁcation
Biotic classiﬁcation
Whitewater classiﬁcation
Stream order classiﬁcation

Uses
Ecosystem
Chemistry
Brackish water
Flooding
Flow
Direction
Rate
Fluvial erosion
Sediment yield
Management
See also
References
Further reading

Topography
A river begins at a source (or more often several
sources), follows a path called a course, and ends at a
mouth or mouths. The water in a river is usually
conﬁned to a channel, made up of a stream bed
between banks. In larger rivers there is often also a
wider ﬂoodplain shaped by ﬂood-waters over-topping
the channel. Floodplains may be very wide in relation
to the size of the river channel. This distinction
between river channel and ﬂoodplain can be blurred,
especially in urban areas where the ﬂoodplain of a
river channel can become greatly developed by
housing and industry.

The Colorado River at
Horseshoe Bend, Arizona

Rivers can ﬂow down mountains, through valleys
(depressions) or along plains, and can create canyons
or gorges.
The term upriver (or upstream) refers to the direction
towards the source of the river, i.e. against the
direction of ﬂow. Likewise, the term downriver (or
downstream) describes the direction towards the
mouth of the river, in which the current ﬂows.
The term left bank refers to the left bank in the
direction of ﬂow, right bank to the right.

The Porvoo River (Porvoonjoki)
in the medieval town of Porvoo,
Finland

The river channel typically contains a single stream of water, but some rivers ﬂow as
several interconnecting streams of water, producing a braided river.[4] Extensive
braided rivers are now found in only a few regions worldwide, such as the South

Island of New Zealand. They also occur on peneplains and some of the larger river
deltas. Anastamosing rivers are similar to braided rivers and are quite rare. They
have multiple sinuous channels carrying large volumes of sediment. There are rare
cases of river bifurcation in which a river divides and the resultant ﬂows ending in
diﬀerent seas. An example is the bifurcation of Nerodime River in Kosovo.
A river ﬂowing in its channel is a source of energy
which acts on the river channel to change its shape
and form. In 1757, the German hydrologist Albert
Brahms empirically observed that the submerged
weight of objects that may be carried away by a river
is proportional to the sixth power of the river ﬂow
speed.[5] This formulation is also sometimes called
Airy's law.[6] Thus, if the speed of ﬂow is doubled, the
ﬂow would dislodge objects with 64 times as much
submerged weight. In mountainous torrential zones
The River Cam from the Green
this can be seen as erosion channels through hard
Dragon Bridge, Cambridge
rocks and the creation of sands and gravels from the
(Britain)
destruction of larger rocks. A river valley that was
created from a U-shaped glaciated valley, can often
easily be identiﬁed by the V-shaped channel that it has carved. In the middle reaches
where a river ﬂows over ﬂatter land, meanders may form through erosion of the river
banks and deposition on the inside of bends. Sometimes the river will cut oﬀ a loop,
shortening the channel and forming an oxbow lake or billabong. Rivers that carry
large amounts of sediment may develop conspicuous deltas at their mouths. Rivers
whose mouths are in saline tidal waters may form estuaries.
Throughout the course of the river, the total volume of water transported
downstream will often be a combination of the free water ﬂow together with a
substantial volume ﬂowing through sub-surface rocks and gravels that underlie the
river and its ﬂoodplain (called the hyporheic zone). For many rivers in large valleys,
this unseen component of ﬂow may greatly exceed the visible ﬂow.

Subsurface streams
Most but not all rivers ﬂow on the surface.
Subterranean rivers ﬂow underground in caves or
caverns. Such rivers are frequently found in regions
with limestone geologic formations. Subglacial
streams are the braided rivers that ﬂow at the beds of
glaciers and ice sheets, permitting meltwater to be
discharged at the front of the glacier. Because of the
gradient in pressure due to the overlying weight of
the glacier, such streams can even ﬂow uphill.

Melting toe of Athabasca
Glacier, Jasper National Park,
Alberta, Canada

Permanence of ﬂow
An intermittent river (or ephemeral river) only ﬂows occasionally and can be dry for
several years at a time. These rivers are found in regions with limited or highly
variable rainfall, or can occur because of geologic conditions such as a highly
permeable river bed. Some ephemeral rivers ﬂow during the summer months but not

in the winter. Such rivers are typically fed from chalk aquifers which recharge from
winter rainfall. In England these rivers are called bournes and give their name to
places such as Bournemouth and Eastbourne. Even in humid regions, the location
where ﬂow begins in the smallest tributary streams generally moves upstream in
response to precipitation and downstream in its absence or when active summer
vegetation diverts water for evapotranspiration. Normally-dry rivers in arid zones
are often identiﬁed as arroyos or other regional names.
The meltwater from large hailstorms can create a slurry of water, hail and sand or
soil, forming temporary rivers.[7]

Classiﬁcation
Rivers have been classiﬁed by many criteria including
their topography, their biotic status, and their
relevance to white water rafting or canoeing
activities.

Topographical classiﬁcation
Rivers can generally be classiﬁed as either alluvial,
bedrock, or some mix of the two. Alluvial rivers have
channels and ﬂoodplains that are self-formed in
unconsolidated or weakly consolidated sediments.
They erode their banks and deposit material on bars
and their ﬂoodplains. Bedrock rivers form when the
Nile River delta, as seen from
river downcuts through the modern sediments and
Earth orbit. The Nile is an
into the underlying bedrock. This occurs in regions
example of a wave-dominated
that have experienced some kind of uplift (thereby
delta that has the classic Greek
steepening river gradients) or in which a particular
letter delta (Δ) shape after
hard lithology causes a river to have a steepened
which river deltas were named.
reach that has not been covered in modern alluvium.
Bedrock rivers very often contain alluvium on their
beds; this material is important in eroding and sculpting the channel. Rivers that go
through patches of bedrock and patches of deep alluvial cover are classiﬁed as mixed
bedrock-alluvial.
Alluvial rivers can be further classiﬁed by their channel pattern as meandering,
braided, wandering, anastomose, or straight. The morphology of an alluvial river
reach is controlled by a combination of sediment supply, substrate composition,
discharge, vegetation, and bed aggradation.
At the start of the 20th century William Morris Davis devised the "cycle of erosion"
method of classifying rivers based on their "age". Although Davis's system is still
found in many books today, after the 1950s and 1960s it became increasingly
criticized and rejected by geomorphologists. His scheme did not produce testable
hypotheses and was therefore deemed non-scientiﬁc.[8] Examples of Davis's river
"ages" include:

Youthful river: A river with a steep gradient that has
very few tributaries and ﬂows quickly. Its channels erode
deeper rather than wider. Examples are the Brazos,
Trinity and Ebro rivers.
Mature river: A river with a gradient that is less steep
than those of youthful rivers and ﬂows more slowly. A
mature river is fed by many tributaries and has more
discharge than a youthful river. Its channels erode wider
rather than deeper. Examples are the Mississippi, Saint
Lawrence, Danube, Ohio, Thames and Paraná rivers.
Old river: A river with a low gradient and low erosive
energy. Old rivers are characterized by ﬂood plains.
Examples are the Yellow, lower Ganges, Tigris, Euphrates,
Indus and lower Nile rivers.
Rejuvenated river: A river with a gradient that is raised
by tectonic uplift. Examples are the Rio Grande and
Colorado River.
The ways in which a river's characteristics vary between its
upper and lower course are summarized by the Bradshaw
model. Power-law relationships between channel slope,
depth, and width are given as a function of discharge by
"river regime".

Biotic classiﬁcation
There are several systems of classiﬁcation based on biotic
conditions typically assigning classes from the most
oligotrophic or unpolluted through to the most eutrophic or
polluted.[9] Other systems are based on a whole eco-system
approach such as developed by the New Zealand Ministry
for the Environment.[10] In Europe, the requirements of the
Water Framework Directive has led to the development of a
wide
range
of
classiﬁcation
methods
including
classiﬁcations based on ﬁshery status[11] A system of river
zonation used in francophone communities[12][13] divides
rivers into three primary zones:
The crenon is the uppermost zone at the source of the
river. It is further divided into the eucrenon (spring or boil
zone) and the hypocrenon (brook or headstream zone).
These areas have low temperatures, reduced oxygen
content and slow moving water.
The rhithron is the upstream portion of the river that
follows the crenon. It has relatively cool temperatures,
high oxygen levels, and fast, turbulent, swift ﬂow.
The potamon is the remaining downstream stretch of
river. It has warmer temperatures, lower oxygen levels,
slow ﬂow and sandier bottoms.

A radar image of a 400kilometre (250 mi) river
of methane and ethane
near the north pole of
Saturn's moon Titan

Whitewater classiﬁcation
The International Scale of River Diﬀiculty is used to rate the challenges of navigation
—particularly those with rapids. Class I is the easiest and Class VI is the hardest.

Stream order classiﬁcation
The Strahler Stream Order ranks rivers based on the connectivity and hierarchy of
contributing tributaries. Headwaters are ﬁrst order while the Amazon River is
twelfth order. Approximately 80% of the rivers and streams in the world are of the
ﬁrst and second order.
In certain languages, distinctions are made among rivers based on their stream
order. In French, for example, rivers that run to the sea are called ﬂeuve, while other
rivers are called rivière. For example, in Canada, the Churchill River in Manitoba is
called la rivière Churchill as it runs to Hudson Bay, but the Churchill River in
Labrador is called le ﬂeuve Churchill as it runs to the Atlantic Ocean. As most rivers
in France are known by their names only without the word rivière or ﬂeuve (e.g. la
Seine, not le ﬂeuve Seine, even though the Seine is classed as a ﬂeuve), one of the
most prominent rivers in the Francophonie commonly known as ﬂeuve is le ﬂeuve
Saint-Laurent (the Saint Lawrence River).
Since many ﬂeuves are large and prominent, receiving many tributaries, the word is
sometimes used to refer to certain large rivers that ﬂow into other ﬂeuves; however,
even small streams that run to the sea are called ﬂeuve (e.g. ﬂeuve côtier, "coastal
ﬂeuve").

Uses
Rivers have been a source of food since prehistory.[14] They are often a rich source of ﬁsh and
other edible aquatic life, and are a major source of
fresh water, which can be used for drinking and
irrigation. Rivers help to determine the urban form of
cities and neighbourhoods and their corridors often
present opportunities for urban renewal through the
development of foreshoreways such as river walks.
Rivers also provide an easy means of disposing of
waste water and, in much of the less developed world,
other wastes.

Leisure activities on the River
Avon at Avon Valley Country
Park, Keynsham, United
Kingdom. A boat giving trips to
the public passes a moored
private boat.

Rivers have been used for navigation for thousands of
years. The earliest evidence of navigation is found in
the Indus Valley Civilization, which existed in
northwestern India around 3300 BC.[15] Riverine
navigation provides a cheap means of transport, and is still used extensively on most
major rivers of the world like the Amazon, the Ganges, the Nile, the Mississippi, and
the Indus. Since river boats are often not regulated, they contribute a large amount
to global greenhouse gas emissions, and to local cancer due to inhaling of
particulates emitted by the transports.[16][17]

Rivers have been important in determining political boundaries and defending
countries. For example, the Danube was a long-standing border of the Roman
Empire, and today it forms most of the border between Bulgaria and Romania. The
Mississippi in North America and the Rhine in Europe are major east-west
boundaries in those continents. The Orange and Limpopo Rivers in southern Africa
form the boundaries between provinces and countries along their routes.
In some heavily forested regions such as Scandinavia and Canada, lumberjacks use
the river to ﬂoat felled trees downstream to lumber camps for further processing,
saving much eﬀort and cost by transporting the huge heavy logs by natural means.
Fast ﬂowing rivers and waterfalls are widely used as
sources of energy, via watermills and hydroelectric
plants. Evidence of watermills shows them in use for
many hundreds of years, for instance in Orkney at
Dounby Click Mill. Prior to the invention of steam
power, watermills for grinding cereals and for
processing wool and other textiles were common
across Europe. In the 1890s the ﬁrst machines to
generate power from river water were established at
places such as Cragside in Northumberland and in
Watermill in Belgium
recent decades there has been a signiﬁcant increase
in the development of large scale power generation
from water, especially in wet mountainous regions such as Norway.
The coarse sediments, gravel, and sand, generated and moved by rivers are
extensively used in construction. In parts of the world this can generate extensive
new lake habitats as gravel pits re-ﬁll with water. In other circumstances it can
destabilise the river bed and the course of the river and cause severe damage to
spawning ﬁsh populations which rely on stable gravel formations for egg laying. In
upland rivers, rapids with whitewater or even waterfalls occur. Rapids are often used
for recreation, such as whitewater kayaking.[18]

Ecosystem
The organisms in the riparian zone respond to changes in river channel location and
patterns of ﬂow. The ecosystem of rivers is generally described by the river
continuum concept, which has some additions and reﬁnements to allow for dams and
waterfalls and temporary extensive ﬂooding. The concept describes the river as a
system in which the physical parameters, the availability of food particles and the
composition of the ecosystem are continuously changing along its length. The food
(energy) that remains from the upstream part is used downstream.
The general pattern is that the ﬁrst order streams contain particulate matter
(decaying leaves from the surrounding forests) which is processed there by
shredders like Plecoptera larvae. The products of these shredders are used by
collectors, such as Hydropsychidae, and further downstream algae that create the
primary production become the main food source of the organisms. All changes are
gradual and the distribution of each species can be described as a normal curve,
with the highest density where the conditions are optimal. In rivers succession is
virtually absent and the composition of the ecosystem stays ﬁxed in time.

Chemistry
The chemistry of rivers is complex and depends on inputs from the atmosphere, the
geology through which it travels and the inputs from man's activities. The chemical
composition of the water has a large impact on the ecology of that water for both
plants and animals and it also aﬀects the uses that may be made of the river water.
Understanding and characterising river water chemistry requires a well designed
and managed sampling and analysis.

Brackish water
Some rivers generate brackish water by having their river mouth in the ocean.

Flooding
Flooding is a natural part of a river's cycle. The
majority of the erosion of river channels and the
erosion and deposition on the associated ﬂoodplains
occur during the ﬂood stage. In many developed
areas, human activity has changed the form of river
channels, altering magnitudes and frequencies of
ﬂooding. Some examples of this are the building of
levees, the straightening of channels, and the
Flash ﬂooding caused by a large
draining of natural wetlands. In many cases human
amount of rain falling in a short
activities in rivers and ﬂoodplains have dramatically
amount of time
increased the risk of ﬂooding. Straightening rivers
allows water to ﬂow more rapidly downstream,
increasing the risk of ﬂooding places further
downstream. Building on ﬂood plains removes ﬂood storage, which again
exacerbates downstream ﬂooding. The building of levees only protects the area
behind the levees and not those further downstream. Levees and ﬂood-banks can
also increase ﬂooding upstream because of the back-water pressure as the river ﬂow
is impeded by the narrow channel banks. Detention basins ﬁnally also reduce the
risk of ﬂooding signiﬁcantly by being able to take up some of the ﬂood water.

Flow
Studying the ﬂows of rivers is one aspect of hydrology.[19]

Direction
Rivers ﬂow downhill with their power derived from gravity. The direction can involve
all directions of the compass and can be a complex meandering path.[20][21][22]
Rivers ﬂowing downhill, from river source to river mouth, do not necessarily take the
shortest path. For alluvial streams, straight and braided rivers have very low
sinuosity and ﬂow directly down hill, while meandering rivers ﬂow from side to side

across a valley. Bedrock rivers typically ﬂow in either
a fractal pattern, or a pattern that is determined by
weaknesses in the bedrock, such as faults, fractures,
or more erodible layers.

Rate
Volumetric ﬂow rate, also known as discharge, volume
ﬂow rate, and rate of water ﬂow, is the volume of
water which passes through a given cross-section of
the river channel per unit time. It is typically
measured in cubic metres per second (cumec) or cubic
feet per second (cfs), where 1 m3/s = 35.51 ft3/s; it is
sometimes also measured in litres or gallons per
second.
Volumetric ﬂow rate can be thought of as the mean
velocity of the ﬂow through a given cross-section,
times that cross-sectional area. Mean velocity can be
approximated through the use of the Law of the Wall.
In general, velocity increases with the depth (or
River meandering course
hydraulic radius) and slope of the river channel, while
the cross-sectional area scales with the depth and the
width: the double-counting of depth shows the importance of this variable in
determining the discharge through the channel.

Fluvial erosion
In its youthful stage the river causes erosion in the water-course, deepening the
valley. Hydraulic action loosens and dislodges the rock which further erodes the
banks and the river bed. Over time, this deepens the river bed and creates steeper
sides which are then weathered.
The steepened nature of the banks causes the sides of the valley to move downslope
causing the valley to become V-shaped.
Waterfalls also form in the youthful river valley where a band of hard rock overlays a
layer of soft rock. Diﬀerential erosion occurs as the river erodes the soft rock more
readily than the hard rock, this leaves the hard rock more elevated and stands out
from the river below. A plunge pool forms at the bottom and deepens as a result of
hydraulic action and abrasion.[23]

Sediment yield
Sediment yield is the total quantity of particulate matter (suspended or bedload)
reaching the outlet of a drainage basin over a ﬁxed time frame. Yield is usually
expressed as kilograms per square kilometre per year. Sediment delivery processes
are aﬀected by a myriad of factors such as drainage area size, basin slope, climate,
sediment type (lithology), vegetation cover, and human land use / management
practices. The theoretical concept of the 'sediment delivery ratio' (ratio between

yield and total amount of sediment eroded) captures the fact that not all of the
sediment is eroded within a certain catchment that reaches out to the outlet (due to,
for example, deposition on ﬂoodplains). Such storage opportunities are typically
increased in catchments of larger size, thus leading to a lower yield and sediment
delivery ratio.

Management
Rivers are often managed or controlled to make them
more useful or less disruptive to human activity.
Dams or weirs may be built to control the ﬂow,
store water, or extract energy.
Levees, known as dikes in Europe, may be built to
prevent river water from ﬂowing on ﬂoodplains or
ﬂoodways.
Canals connect rivers to one another for water
transfer or navigation.
River courses may be modiﬁed to improve
navigation, or straightened to increase the ﬂow
rate.

Frozen river in Alaska

River management is a continuous activity as rivers
tend to 'undo' the modiﬁcations made by people.
Dredged channels silt up, sluice mechanisms
deteriorate with age, levees and dams may suﬀer
seepage or catastrophic failure. The beneﬁts sought
River bank repair
through managing rivers may often be oﬀset by the
social and economic costs of mitigating the bad
eﬀects of such management. As an example, in parts of the developed world, rivers
have been conﬁned within channels to free up ﬂat ﬂood-plain land for development.
Floods can inundate such development at high ﬁnancial cost and often with loss of
life.
Rivers are increasingly managed for habitat conservation, as they are critical for
many aquatic and riparian plants, resident and migratory ﬁshes, waterfowl, birds of
prey, migrating birds, and many mammals.

See also
Arts, entertainment, and media
"Old Man River"
The Riverkeepers (book)
General
Drought
Fluvial
Salt tide

Water conﬂict
Crossings
Bridge
Ferry
Ford (crossing)
Tunnel
Habitats
Exposed riverine sediments
Riparian zone
Lists
Lists of rivers
List of international border rivers
List of rivers by continent
List of rivers by discharge
List of rivers by length
List of waterways
Transport
Barge
Raft
River transport
Riverboat
Sailing
Steamboat
Towpath
Yacht

References
1. "Mapping, Remote Sensing, and Geospatial Data: What is the diﬀerence between
'mountain', 'hill', and 'peak'; 'lake' and 'pond'; or 'river' and 'creek?' " (https://www.
usgs.gov/faqs/what-diﬀerence-between-mountain-hill-and-peak-lake-and-pond-or-ri
ver-and-creek). United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 25 August 2019.
2. "WordNet Search: River" (http://wordnetweb.princeton.edu/perl/webwn?s=river&su
b=Search+WordNet&o2=&o0=1&o7=&o5=&o1=1&o6=&o4=&o3=&h=). The
Trustees of Princeton University. Retrieved 2 October 2009.
3. Basic Biology (16 January 2016). "River" (https://basicbiology.net/environment/fres
hwater/river).
4. Walther, John V. (15 February 2013). Earth's Natural Resources (https://books.googl
e.com/books?id=dWMqaOTqSqcC&pg=PA308). Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
ISBN 978-1-4496-3234-2.

5. Garde, R.J. (1995). History of ﬂuvial hydraulics (https://books.google.com/books?id
=MWXvfQ6UGjgC&pg=PA14). New Age Publishers. p. 14. ISBN 978-81-224-0815-7.
OCLC 34628134 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/34628134).
6. Garde, R.J. (1995). History of ﬂuvial hydraulics (https://books.google.com/books?id
=MWXvfQ6UGjgC&pg=PA19). New Age Publishers. p. 19. ISBN 978-81-224-0815-7.
OCLC 34628134 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/34628134).
7. "Sand River" in Iraq is actually a rapid movement of ice blocks (http://www.tampab
ayreview.com/news/sand-river-in-iraq/1211/). Tampabayreview.com. Retrieved on
14 July 2016.
8. Castree, Noel (2006). Questioning geography: fundamental debates (https://books.
google.com/books?id=nrbzXM_woFQC&pg=PA84). Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 84–85.
ISBN 978-1-4051-0192-9.
9. River Classiﬁcation scheme (https://web.archive.org/web/20120620161237/http://w
ww.sepa.org.uk/science_and_research/classiﬁcation_schemes/river_classiﬁcations_s
cheme.aspx). sepa.org.uk
10. NZ’s River Environment Classiﬁcation system (REC) (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0100522192903/http://www.maf.govt.nz/mafnet/publications/rmupdate/rm14/rm14
-04.htm). maf.govt.nz
11. Noble, Richard and Cowx, Ian et al. (May 2002) Compilation and harmonisation of
ﬁsh species classiﬁcation (http://fame.boku.ac.at/downloads/D1_2_typology_and%2
0species_classiﬁcation.pdf). University of Hull, UK. A project under the 5th
Framework Programme Energy, Environment and Sustainable Management. Key
Action 1: Sustainable Management and Quality of Water
12. Illies, J.; Botosaneanu, L. (1963). "Problémes et méthodes de la classiﬁcation et de
la zonation éologique des eaux courantes, considerées surtout du point de vue
faunistique". Mitt. Int. Ver. Theor. Angew. Limnol. 12: 1–57.
13. Hawkes, H.A. (1975). River zonation and classiﬁcation. River ecology. Blackwell.
pp. 312–374.
14. "National Museum of Prehistory-The Peinan Site-Settlements of the Prehistoric
Times" (http://en.nmp.gov.tw/park01-2.html). nmp.gov.tw.
15. "WWF – The World's Rivers" (http://www.panda.org/about_our_earth/about_freshwa
ter/rivers/). panda.org.
16. Meybeck, Michel (1993). "Riverine transport of atmospheric carbon: Sources,
global typology and budget". Water, Air, & Soil Pollution. 70 (1–4): 443–463.
Bibcode:1993WASP...70..443M (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1993WASP...70..4
43M). doi:10.1007/BF01105015 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2FBF01105015).
17. Albrecht, Achim (2003). "Validating riverine transport and speciation models using
nuclear reactor-derived radiocobalt". Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 66
(3): 295–307. doi:10.1016/S0265-931X(02)00133-9 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0
265-931X%2802%2900133-9). PMID 12600761 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1
2600761).
18. Draper, Nick; Hodgson, Christopher (2008). Adventure Sport Physiology (https://bo
oks.google.com/books?id=0qLSsxFZxqIC&pg=PA25). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780-470-31913-0.
19. Cave, Cristi. "How a River Flows" (https://web.archive.org/web/20150101231739/ht
tp://chamisa.freeshell.org/ﬂow.htm). Stream Biology and Ecology. Archived from
the original (http://chamisa.freeshell.org/ﬂow.htm) on 1 January 2015.
20. Rosenberg, Matt (8 June 2006). "Do All Rivers Flow South?" (http://geography.abou
t.com/b/a/257582.htm). About.com.

21. Rosenberg, Matt. "Rivers Flowing North: Rivers Only Flow Downhill; Rivers Do Not
Prefer to Flow South" (http://geography.about.com/od/learnabouttheearth/a/northri
vers.htm). About.com.
22. Rydell, Nezette (16 March 1997). "Re: What determines the direction of river ﬂow?
Elevation, Topography, Gravity??" (http://www.madsci.org/posts/archives/mar97/85
8609276.Es.r.html). Earth Sciences.
23. "Landforms of the upper valley" (http://www.coolgeography.co.uk/GCSE/Year%201
0/PhysicalWorld/Upper%20valley/upper_valley.htm). www.coolgeography.co.uk.
Retrieved 2 December 2016.

Further reading
Jeﬀrey W. Jacobs. "Rivers, Major World". Rivers, Major World – dam, sea, eﬀects,
important, largest, salt, types, system, source (http://www.waterencyclopedia.com/
Re-St/Rivers-Major-World.html). Water Encyclopaedia.
Luna B. Leopold (1994). A View of the River. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674-93732-1. OCLC 28889034 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/28889034). — a nontechnical primer on the geomorphology and hydraulics of water.
Middleton, Nick (2012). Rivers: a very short introduction. New York: Oxford
University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-958867-1.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=River&oldid=966722396"

This page was last edited on 8 July 2020, at 19:58 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may
apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-proﬁt organization.

