Robot
A robot is a machine—especially one programmable
by a computer— capable of carrying out a complex
series of actions automatically.[2] Robots can be
guided by an external control device or the control
may be embedded within. Robots may be constructed
on the lines of human form, but most robots are
machines designed to perform a task with no regard
to their aesthetics.
Robots can be autonomous or semi-autonomous and
range from humanoids such as Honda's Advanced
Step in Innovative Mobility (ASIMO) and TOSY's
TOSY Ping Pong Playing Robot (TOPIO) to industrial
robots, medical operating robots, patient assist
robots, dog therapy robots, collectively programmed
swarm robots, UAV drones such as General Atomics
MQ-1 Predator, and even microscopic nano robots. By
mimicking a lifelike appearance or automating
movements, a robot may convey a sense of
intelligence or thought of its own. Autonomous things
are expected to proliferate in the coming decade,[3]
with home robotics and the autonomous car as some
of the main drivers.[4]

Atlas (2016), a bipedal
humanoid robot

The branch of technology that deals with the design,
construction, operation, and application of robots,[5]
as well as computer systems for their control, sensory
feedback, and information processing is robotics.
These technologies deal with automated machines
that can take the place of humans in dangerous
environments or manufacturing processes, or
resemble humans in appearance, behavior, or
cognition. Many of today's robots are inspired by
nature contributing to the ﬁeld of bio-inspired
robotics. These robots have also created a newer
branch of robotics: soft robotics.
From the time of ancient civilization there have been
many accounts of user-conﬁgurable automated
ASIMO (2000) at the Expo 2005
devices and even automata resembling animals and
humans, designed primarily as entertainment. As
mechanical techniques developed through the Industrial age, there appeared more
practical applications such as automated machines, remote-control and wireless
remote-control.

The term comes from a Slavic root, robot-, with
meanings associated with labor. The word 'robot' was
ﬁrst used to denote a ﬁctional humanoid in a 1920
Czech-language play R.U.R. (Rossumovi Univerzální
Roboti - Rossum's Universal Robots) by Karel Čapek,
though it was Karel's brother Josef Čapek who was
the word's true inventor.[6][7][8] Electronics evolved
into the driving force of development with the advent
of the ﬁrst electronic autonomous robots created by
William Grey Walter in Bristol, England in 1948, as
well as Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine
tools in the late 1940s by John T. Parsons and Frank
L. Stulen. The ﬁrst commercial, digital and
programmable robot was built by George Devol in
1954 and was named the Unimate. It was sold to
General Motors in 1961 where it was used to lift
pieces of hot metal from die casting machines at the
Inland Fisher Guide Plant in the West Trenton section
of Ewing Township, New Jersey.[9]
Robots have replaced humans[10] in performing
repetitive and dangerous tasks which humans prefer
not to do, or are unable to do because of size
limitations, or which take place in extreme
environments such as outer space or the bottom of
the sea. There are concerns about the increasing use
of robots and their role in society. Robots are blamed
for rising technological unemployment as they
replace
workers
in
increasing
numbers
of
[11]
functions.
The use of robots in military combat
raises ethical concerns. The possibilities of robot
autonomy and potential repercussions have been
addressed in ﬁction and may be a realistic concern in
the future.

Contents
Summary
History
Early beginnings
Remote-controlled systems
Origin of the term 'robot'
Early robots
Modern autonomous robots
Future development and trends
New functionalities and prototypes
Etymology
Modern robots

Articulated welding robots used
in a factory are a type of
industrial robot

The quadrupedal military robot
Cheetah, an evolution of
BigDog (pictured), was clocked
as the world's fastest legged
robot in 2012, beating the
record set by an MIT bipedal
robot in 1989.[1]

Mobile robot
Industrial robots (manipulating)
Service robot
Educational (interactive) robots
Modular robot
Collaborative robots
Robots in society
Autonomy and ethical questions
Military robots
Relationship to unemployment
Contemporary uses
General-purpose autonomous robots
Factory robots
Dirty, dangerous, dull or inaccessible tasks
Military robots
Mining robots
Healthcare
Research robots
Contemporary art and sculpture
Robots in popular culture
Literature
Films
Sex robots
Problems depicted in popular culture
See also
Speciﬁc robotics concepts
Robotics methods and categories
Speciﬁc robots and devices
Other related articles
References
Further reading
External links

Summary
The word robot can refer to both physical robots and virtual software agents, but the
latter are usually referred to as bots.[12] There is no consensus on which machines
qualify as robots but there is general agreement among experts, and the public, that
robots tend to possess some or all of the following abilities and functions: accept
electronic programming, process data or physical perceptions electronically, operate
autonomously to some degree, move around, operate physical parts of itself or
physical processes, sense and manipulate their environment, and exhibit intelligent
behavior, especially behavior which mimics humans or other animals.[13][14] Closely

related to the concept of a robot is the ﬁeld of
Synthetic Biology, which studies entities whose
nature is more comparable to beings than to
machines.

History
The idea of automata originates in the mythologies of
many cultures around the world. Engineers and
inventors from ancient civilizations, including Ancient
China,[15] Ancient Greece, and Ptolemaic Egypt,[16]
attempted to build self-operating machines, some
resembling animals and humans. Early descriptions of
automata include the artiﬁcial doves of Archytas,[17]
the artiﬁcial birds of Mozi and Lu Ban,[18] a
"speaking" automaton by Hero of Alexandria, a
washstand automaton by Philo of Byzantium, and a
human automaton described in the Lie Zi.[15]

KITT (a ﬁctional robot) is
mentally anthropomorphic.

Early beginnings
Many ancient mythologies, and most modern religions
iCub is physically
include artiﬁcial people, such as the mechanical
anthropomorphic.
servants built by the Greek god Hephaestus[19]
(Vulcan to the Romans), the clay golems of Jewish
legend and clay giants of Norse legend, and Galatea, the mythical statue of
Pygmalion that came to life. Since circa 400 BC, myths of Crete include Talos, a man
of bronze who guarded the island from pirates.
In ancient Greece, the Greek engineer Ctesibius (c. 270 BC) "applied a knowledge of
pneumatics and hydraulics to produce the ﬁrst organ and water clocks with moving
ﬁgures."[20][21] In the 4th century BC, the Greek mathematician Archytas of
Tarentum postulated a mechanical steam-operated bird he called "The Pigeon". Hero
of Alexandria (10–70 AD), a Greek mathematician and inventor, created numerous
user-conﬁgurable automated devices, and described machines powered by air
pressure, steam and water.[22]
The 11th century Lokapannatti tells of how the
Buddha's relics were protected by mechanical robots
(bhuta vahana yanta), from the kingdom of Roma
visaya (Rome); until they were disarmed by King
Ashoka. [23] [24]
In ancient China, the 3rd-century text of the Lie Zi
describes an account of humanoid automata,
involving a much earlier encounter between Chinese
emperor King Mu of Zhou and a mechanical engineer
Al-Jazari – A Musical Toy
known as Yan Shi, an 'artiﬁcer'. Yan Shi proudly
presented the king with a life-size, human-shaped
ﬁgure of his mechanical 'handiwork' made of leather, wood, and artiﬁcial organs.[15]

There are also accounts of ﬂying automata in the Han Fei Zi and other texts, which
attributes the 5th century BC Mohist philosopher Mozi and his contemporary Lu Ban
with the invention of artiﬁcial wooden birds (ma yuan) that could successfully ﬂy.[18]
In 1066, the Chinese inventor Su Song built a water
clock in the form of a tower which featured
mechanical
ﬁgurines
which
chimed
the
[25][26][27]
hours.
His mechanism had a programmable
drum machine with pegs (cams) that bumped into
little levers that operated percussion instruments.
The drummer could be made to play diﬀerent rhythms
and diﬀerent drum patterns by moving the pegs to
diﬀerent locations.[27]

Samarangana Sutradhara, a Sanskrit treatise by
Bhoja (11th century), includes a chapter about the
construction of mechanical contrivances (automata),
including mechanical bees and birds, fountains
shaped like humans and animals, and male and
female dolls that reﬁlled oil lamps, danced, played
instruments, and re-enacted scenes from Hindu
mythology.[28][29][30]

Su Song's astronomical clock
tower showing the mechanical
ﬁgurines which chimed the
hours.

13th century Muslim Scientist Ismail al-Jazari created several automated devices. He
built automated moving peacocks driven by hydropower.[31] He also invented the
earliest known automatic gates, which were driven by hydropower,[32] created
automatic doors as part of one of his elaborate water clocks.[33] One of al-Jazari's
humanoid automata was a waitress that could serve water, tea or drinks. The drink
was stored in a tank with a reservoir from where the drink drips into a bucket and,
after seven minutes, into a cup, after which the waitress appears out of an automatic
door serving the drink.[34] Al-Jazari invented a hand washing automaton
incorporating a ﬂush mechanism now used in modern ﬂush toilets. It features a
female humanoid automaton standing by a basin ﬁlled with water. When the user
pulls the lever, the water drains and the female automaton reﬁlls the basin.[35]
Mark E. Rosheim summarizes the advances in robotics made by Muslim engineers,
especially al-Jazari, as follows:
Unlike the Greek designs, these Arab examples reveal an interest, not only
in dramatic illusion, but in manipulating the environment for human
comfort. Thus, the greatest contribution the Arabs made, besides
preserving, disseminating and building on the work of the Greeks, was the
concept of practical application. This was the key element that was missing
in Greek robotic science.[36]
In Renaissance Italy, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) sketched plans for a humanoid
robot around 1495. Da Vinci's notebooks, rediscovered in the 1950s, contained
detailed drawings of a mechanical knight now known as Leonardo's robot, able to sit
up, wave its arms and move its head and jaw.[38] The design was probably based on
anatomical research recorded in his Vitruvian Man. It is not known whether he
attempted to build it. According to Encyclopædia Britannica, Leonardo da Vinci may

have been inﬂuenced by the classic automata of alJazari.[31]
In Japan, complex animal and human automata were
built between the 17th to 19th centuries, with many
described in the 18th century Karakuri zui (Illustrated
Machinery, 1796). One such automaton was the
karakuri ningyō, a mechanized puppet.[39] Diﬀerent
variations of the karakuri existed: the Butai karakuri,
which were used in theatre, the Zashiki karakuri,
which were small and used in homes, and the Dashi
karakuri which were used in religious festivals, where
the puppets were used to perform reenactments of
traditional myths and legends.

Model of Leonardo's robot with
inner workings. Possibly
constructed by Leonardo da
Vinci around 1495.[37]

In France, between 1738 and 1739, Jacques de
Vaucanson exhibited several life-sized automatons: a
ﬂute player, a pipe player and a duck. The mechanical
duck could ﬂap its wings, crane its neck, and swallow food from the exhibitor's hand,
and it gave the illusion of digesting its food by excreting matter stored in a hidden
compartment.[40]

Remote-controlled systems
Remotely operated vehicles were demonstrated in the
late 19th century in the form of several types of
remotely controlled torpedoes. The early 1870s saw
remotely controlled torpedoes by John Ericsson
(pneumatic), John Louis Lay (electric wire guided),
and Victor von Scheliha (electric wire guided).[41]

The Brennan torpedo, one of
the earliest 'guided missiles'

The Brennan torpedo, invented by Louis Brennan in
1877, was powered by two contra-rotating propellors
that were spun by rapidly pulling out wires from drums wound inside the torpedo.
Diﬀerential speed on the wires connected to the shore station allowed the torpedo to
be guided to its target, making it "the world's ﬁrst practical guided missile".[42] In
1897 the British inventor Ernest Wilson was granted a patent for a torpedo remotely
controlled by "Hertzian" (radio) waves[43][44] and in 1898 Nikola Tesla publicly
demonstrated a wireless-controlled torpedo that he hoped to sell to the US
Navy.[45][46]
Archibald Low, known as the "father of radio guidance systems" for his pioneering
work on guided rockets and planes during the First World War. In 1917, he
demonstrated a remote controlled aircraft to the Royal Flying Corps and in the same
year built the ﬁrst wire-guided rocket.

Origin of the term 'robot'
'Robot' was ﬁrst applied as a term for artiﬁcial automata in the 1920 play R.U.R. by
the Czech writer, Karel Čapek. However, Josef Čapek was named by his brother Karel
as the true inventor of the term robot.[7][8] The word 'robot' itself was not new,

having been in the Slavic language as robota (forced laborer), a term which
classiﬁed those peasants obligated to compulsory service under the feudal system
(see: Robot Patent).[47][48] Čapek's ﬁctional story postulated the technological
creation of artiﬁcial human bodies without souls, and the old theme of the feudal
robota class eloquently ﬁt the imagination of a new class of manufactured, artiﬁcial
workers.
English pronunciation of the word has evolved relatively quickly since its
introduction. In the U.S. during the late '30s to early '40s the second sylable was
pronounced with a long "O" like "row-boat."[49] By the late '50s to early '60s, some
were pronouncing it with a short "U" like "row-but" while others used a softer "O"
like "row-bought."[50] By the '70s, its current pronunciation "row-bot" had become
predominant.

Early robots
In 1928, one of the ﬁrst humanoid robots, Eric, was
exhibited at the annual exhibition of the Model Engineers
Society in London, where it delivered a speech. Invented by
W. H. Richards, the robot's frame consisted of an aluminium
body of armour with eleven electromagnets and one motor
powered by a twelve-volt power source. The robot could
move its hands and head and could be controlled through
remote control or voice control.[51] Both Eric and his
"brother" George toured the world.[52]
Westinghouse Electric Corporation built Televox in 1926; it
was a cardboard cutout connected to various devices which
users could turn on and oﬀ. In 1939, the humanoid robot
known as Elektro was debuted at the 1939 New York
W. H. Richards with
World's Fair.[53][54] Seven feet tall (2.1 m) and weighing 265
"George", 1932
pounds (120.2 kg), it could walk by voice command, speak
about 700 words (using a 78-rpm record player), smoke
cigarettes, blow up balloons, and move its head and arms. The body consisted of a
steel gear, cam and motor skeleton covered by an aluminum skin. In 1928, Japan's
ﬁrst robot, Gakutensoku, was designed and constructed by biologist Makoto
Nishimura.

Modern autonomous robots
The ﬁrst electronic autonomous robots with complex behaviour were created by
William Grey Walter of the Burden Neurological Institute at Bristol, England in 1948
and 1949. He wanted to prove that rich connections between a small number of
brain cells could give rise to very complex behaviors – essentially that the secret of
how the brain worked lay in how it was wired up. His ﬁrst robots, named Elmer and
Elsie, were constructed between 1948 and 1949 and were often described as
tortoises due to their shape and slow rate of movement. The three-wheeled tortoise
robots were capable of phototaxis, by which they could ﬁnd their way to a recharging
station when they ran low on battery power.

Walter stressed the importance of using purely analogue electronics to simulate
brain processes at a time when his contemporaries such as Alan Turing and John von
Neumann were all turning towards a view of mental processes in terms of digital
computation. His work inspired subsequent generations of robotics researchers such
as Rodney Brooks, Hans Moravec and Mark Tilden. Modern incarnations of Walter's
turtles may be found in the form of BEAM robotics.[55]
The ﬁrst digitally operated and programmable robot
was invented by George Devol in 1954 and was
ultimately called the Unimate. This ultimately laid the
foundations of the modern robotics industry.[56] Devol
sold the ﬁrst Unimate to General Motors in 1960, and
it was installed in 1961 in a plant in Trenton, New
Jersey to lift hot pieces of metal from a die casting
machine and stack them.[57] Devol's patent for the
ﬁrst digitally operated programmable robotic arm
represents the foundation of the modern robotics
industry.[58]

U.S. Patent 2,988,237, issued in
1961 to Devol.

The ﬁrst palletizing robot was introduced in 1963 by
the Fuji Yusoki Kogyo Company.[59] In 1973, a robot
with six electromechanically driven axes was
patented[60][61][62] by KUKA robotics in Germany, and
the programmable universal manipulation arm was
invented by Victor Scheinman in 1976, and the design
was sold to Unimation.

Commercial and industrial robots are now in
widespread use performing jobs more cheaply or with
greater accuracy and reliability than humans. They are also employed for jobs which
are too dirty, dangerous or dull to be suitable for humans. Robots are widely used in
manufacturing, assembly and packing, transport, earth and space exploration,
surgery, weaponry, laboratory research, and mass production of consumer and
industrial goods.[63]

Future development and trends
External video
Various techniques have emerged to develop the
science of robotics and robots. One method is
Atlas, The Next Generation
evolutionary robotics, in which a number of diﬀering
(https://www.youtube.com/watc
robots are submitted to tests. Those which perform
h?v=rVlhMGQgDkY)
best are used as a model to create a subsequent
"generation"
of
robots.
Another
method
is
developmental robotics, which tracks changes and development within a single robot
in the areas of problem-solving and other functions. Another new type of robot is just
recently introduced which acts both as a smartphone and robot and is named
RoboHon.[64]
As robots become more advanced, eventually there may be a standard computer
operating system designed mainly for robots. Robot Operating System is an opensource set of programs being developed at Stanford University, the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and the Technical University of Munich, Germany, among

others. ROS provides ways to program a robot's navigation and limbs regardless of
the speciﬁc hardware involved. It also provides high-level commands for items like
image recognition and even opening doors. When ROS boots up on a robot's
computer, it would obtain data on attributes such as the length and movement of
robots' limbs. It would relay this data to higher-level algorithms. Microsoft is also
developing a "Windows for robots" system with its Robotics Developer Studio, which
has been available since 2007.[65]
Japan hopes to have full-scale commercialization of service robots by 2025. Much
technological research in Japan is led by Japanese government agencies, particularly
the Trade Ministry.[66]
Many future applications of robotics seem obvious to people, even though they are
well beyond the capabilities of robots available at the time of the prediction.[67][68]
As early as 1982 people were conﬁdent that someday robots would:[69] 1. Clean parts
by removing molding ﬂash 2. Spray paint automobiles with absolutely no human
presence 3. Pack things in boxes—for example, orient and nest chocolate candies in
candy boxes 4. Make electrical cable harness 5. Load trucks with boxes—a packing
problem 6. Handle soft goods, such as garments and shoes 7. Shear sheep 8.
prosthesis 9. Cook fast food and work in other service industries 10. Household
robot.
Generally such predictions are overly optimistic in timescale.

New functionalities and prototypes
In 2008, Caterpillar Inc. developed a dump truck which can drive itself without any
human operator.[70] Many analysts believe that self-driving trucks may eventually
revolutionize logistics.[71] By 2014, Caterpillar had a self-driving dump truck which is
expected to greatly change the process of mining. In 2015, these Caterpillar trucks
were actively used in mining operations in Australia by the mining company Rio
Tinto Coal Australia.[72][73][74][75] Some analysts believe that within the next few
decades, most trucks will be self-driving.[76]
A literate or 'reading robot' named Marge has intelligence that comes from software.
She can read newspapers, ﬁnd and correct misspelled words, learn about banks like
Barclays, and understand that some restaurants are better places to eat than
others.[77]
Baxter is a new robot introduced in 2012 which learns by guidance. A worker could
teach Baxter how to perform a task by moving its hands in the desired motion and
having Baxter memorize them. Extra dials, buttons, and controls are available on
Baxter's arm for more precision and features. Any regular worker could program
Baxter and it only takes a matter of minutes, unlike usual industrial robots that take
extensive programs and coding in order to be used. This means Baxter needs no
programming in order to operate. No software engineers are needed. This also
means Baxter can be taught to perform multiple, more complicated tasks. Sawyer
was added in 2015 for smaller, more precise tasks.[78]

Etymology

The word robot was introduced to the public by the
Czech interwar writer Karel Čapek in his play R.U.R.
(Rossum's Universal Robots), published in 1920.[79]
The play begins in a factory that uses a chemical
substitute for protoplasm to manufacture living,
simpliﬁed people called robots. The play does not
focus in detail on the technology behind the creation
of these living creatures, but in their appearance they
A scene from Karel Čapek's
preﬁgure modern ideas of androids, creatures who
1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum's
can be mistaken for humans. These mass-produced
Universal Robots), showing
workers are depicted as eﬀicient but emotionless,
three robots
incapable of original thinking and indiﬀerent to selfpreservation. At issue is whether the robots are being
exploited and the consequences of human dependence upon commodiﬁed labor
(especially after a number of specially-formulated robots achieve self-awareness and
incite robots all around the world to rise up against the humans).
Karel Čapek himself did not coin the word. He wrote a short letter in reference to an
etymology in the Oxford English Dictionary in which he named his brother, the
painter and writer Josef Čapek, as its actual originator.[79]
In an article in the Czech journal Lidové noviny in 1933, he explained that he had
originally wanted to call the creatures laboři ("workers", from Latin labor). However,
he did not like the word, and sought advice from his brother Josef, who suggested
"roboti". The word robota means literally "corvée", "serf labor", and ﬁguratively
"drudgery" or "hard work" in Czech and also (more general) "work", "labor" in many
Slavic languages (e.g.: Bulgarian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Polish, Macedonian,
Ukrainian, archaic Czech, as well as robot in Hungarian). Traditionally the robota
(Hungarian robot) was the work period a serf (corvée) had to give for his lord,
typically 6 months of the year. The origin of the word is the Old Church Slavonic (Old
Bulgarian) rabota "servitude" ("work" in contemporary Bulgarian and Russian),
which in turn comes from the Proto-Indo-European root *orbh-. Robot is cognate with
the German root Arbeit (work).[80][81]
The word robotics, used to describe this ﬁeld of study,[5] was coined by the science
ﬁction writer Isaac Asimov. Asimov created the "Three Laws of Robotics" which are a
recurring theme in his books. These have since been used by many others to deﬁne
laws used in ﬁction. (The three laws are pure ﬁction, and no technology yet created
has the ability to understand or follow them, and in fact most robots serve military
purposes, which run quite contrary to the ﬁrst law and often the third law. "People
think about Asimov's laws, but they were set up to point out how a simple ethical
system doesn't work. If you read the short stories, every single one is about a failure,
and they are totally impractical," said Dr. Joanna Bryson of the University of
Bath.[82])

Modern robots
Mobile robot

Mobile robots[83] have the capability to move around
in their environment and are not ﬁxed to one physical
location. An example of a mobile robot that is in
common use today is the automated guided vehicle or
automatic guided vehicle (AGV). An AGV is a mobile
robot that follows markers or wires in the ﬂoor, or
uses vision or lasers.[84] AGVs are discussed later in
this article.
Mobile robots are also found in industry, military and
security environments.[85] They also appear as
consumer products, for entertainment or to perform
certain tasks like vacuum cleaning. Mobile robots are
the focus of a great deal of current research and
almost every major university has one or more labs
that focus on mobile robot research.
Mobile robots are usually used in tightly controlled
A laparoscopic robotic surgery
environments such as on assembly lines because they
machine
have diﬀiculty responding to unexpected interference.
Because of this most humans rarely encounter robots.
However
domestic
robots
for
cleaning
and
maintenance are increasingly common in and around homes in developed countries.
Robots can also be found in military applications.

Industrial robots (manipulating)
Industrial robots usually consist of a jointed arm
(multi-linked manipulator) and an end eﬀector that is
attached to a ﬁxed surface. One of the most common
type of end eﬀector is a gripper assembly.
The International Organization for Standardization
gives a deﬁnition of a manipulating industrial robot in
ISO 8373:

A pick and place robot in a
factory

"an
automatically
controlled,
reprogrammable,
multipurpose, manipulator programmable in three or
more axes, which may be either ﬁxed in place or
mobile
for
use
in
industrial
automation
[86]
applications."

This deﬁnition is used by the International Federation
of Robotics, the European Robotics Research Network (EURON) and many national
standards committees.[87]

Service robot
Most commonly industrial robots are ﬁxed robotic arms and manipulators used
primarily for production and distribution of goods. The term "service robot" is less
well-deﬁned. The International Federation of Robotics has proposed a tentative

deﬁnition, "A service robot is a robot which operates semi- or fully autonomously to
perform services useful to the well-being of humans and equipment, excluding
manufacturing operations."[88]

Educational (interactive) robots
Robots are used as educational assistants to teachers. From the 1980s, robots such
as turtles were used in schools and programmed using the Logo language.[89][90]
There are robot kits like Lego Mindstorms, BIOLOID, OLLO from ROBOTIS, or
BotBrain Educational Robots can help children to learn about mathematics, physics,
programming, and electronics. Robotics have also been introduced into the lives of
elementary and high school students in the form of robot competitions with the
company FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science and Technology). The
organization is the foundation for the FIRST Robotics Competition, FIRST LEGO
League, Junior FIRST LEGO League, and FIRST Tech Challenge competitions.
There have also been robots such as the teaching computer, Leachim (1974).[91]
Leachim was an early example of speech synthesis using the using the Diphone
synthesis method. 2-XL (1976) was a robot shaped game / teaching toy based on
branching between audible tracks on an 8-track tape player, both invented by
Michael J. Freeman.[92] Later, the 8-track was upgraded to tape cassettes and then to
digital.

Modular robot
Modular robots are a new breed of robots that are designed to increase the
utilization of robots by modularizing their architecture.[93] The functionality and
eﬀectiveness of a modular robot is easier to increase compared to conventional
robots. These robots are composed of a single type of identical, several diﬀerent
identical module types, or similarly shaped modules, which vary in size. Their
architectural structure allows hyper-redundancy for modular robots, as they can be
designed with more than 8 degrees of freedom (DOF). Creating the programming,
inverse kinematics and dynamics for modular robots is more complex than with
traditional robots. Modular robots may be composed of L-shaped modules, cubic
modules, and U and H-shaped modules. ANAT technology, an early modular robotic
technology patented by Robotics Design Inc., allows the creation of modular robots
from U and H shaped modules that connect in a chain, and are used to form
heterogeneous and homogenous modular robot systems. These "ANAT robots" can be
designed with "n" DOF as each module is a complete motorized robotic system that
folds relatively to the modules connected before and after it in its chain, and
therefore a single module allows one degree of freedom. The more modules that are
connected to one another, the more degrees of freedom it will have. L-shaped
modules can also be designed in a chain, and must become increasingly smaller as
the size of the chain increases, as payloads attached to the end of the chain place a
greater strain on modules that are further from the base. ANAT H-shaped modules
do not suﬀer from this problem, as their design allows a modular robot to distribute
pressure and impacts evenly amongst other attached modules, and therefore
payload-carrying capacity does not decrease as the length of the arm increases.
Modular robots can be manually or self-reconﬁgured to form a diﬀerent robot, that
may perform diﬀerent applications. Because modular robots of the same architecture

type are composed of modules that compose diﬀerent modular robots, a snake-arm
robot can combine with another to form a dual or quadra-arm robot, or can split into
several mobile robots, and mobile robots can split into multiple smaller ones, or
combine with others into a larger or diﬀerent one. This allows a single modular robot
the ability to be fully specialized in a single task, as well as the capacity to be
specialized to perform multiple diﬀerent tasks.
Modular robotic technology is currently being applied in hybrid transportation,[94]
industrial automation,[95] duct cleaning[96] and handling. Many research centres and
universities have also studied this technology, and have developed prototypes.

Collaborative robots
A collaborative robot or cobot is a robot that can safely and eﬀectively interact with
human workers while performing simple industrial tasks. However, end-eﬀectors and
other environmental conditions may create hazards, and as such risk assessments
should be done before using any industrial motion-control application.[97]
The collaborative robots most widely used in industries today are manufactured by
Universal Robots in Denmark.[98]
Rethink Robotics—founded by Rodney Brooks, previously with iRobot—introduced
Baxter in September 2012; as an industrial robot designed to safely interact with
neighboring human workers, and be programmable for performing simple tasks.[99]
Baxters stop if they detect a human in the way of their robotic arms and have
prominent oﬀ switches. Intended for sale to small businesses, they are promoted as
the robotic analogue of the personal computer.[100] As of May 2014, 190 companies
in the US have bought Baxters and they are being used commercially in the UK.[11]

Robots in society
Roughly half of all the robots in the world are in Asia,
32% in Europe, and 16% in North America, 1% in
Australasia and 1% in Africa.[103] 40% of all the
robots in the world are in Japan,[104] making Japan
the country with the highest number of robots.

Autonomy and ethical questions
TOPIO, a humanoid robot,

As robots have become more advanced and
played ping pong at Tokyo
International Robot Exhibition
sophisticated,
experts
and
academics
have
(IREX) 2009[101][102]
increasingly explored the questions of what ethics
might govern robots' behavior,[106] and whether
robots might be able to claim any kind of social,
cultural, ethical or legal rights.[107] One scientiﬁc team has said that it is possible
that a robot brain will exist by 2019.[108] Others predict robot intelligence
breakthroughs by 2050.[109] Recent advances have made robotic behavior more
sophisticated.[110] The social impact of intelligent robots is subject of a 2010
documentary ﬁlm called Plug & Pray.[111]

Vernor Vinge has suggested that a moment may come
when computers and robots are smarter than
humans. He calls this "the Singularity".[112] He
suggests that it may be somewhat or possibly very
dangerous for humans.[113] This is discussed by a
philosophy called Singularitarianism.
In 2009, experts attended a conference hosted by the
Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (AAAI) to discuss whether computers and
robots might be able to acquire any autonomy, and
how much these abilities might pose a threat or
hazard. They noted that some robots have acquired
various forms of semi-autonomy, including being able
to ﬁnd power sources on their own and being able to
independently choose targets to attack with weapons.
They also noted that some computer viruses can
An android, or robot designed
evade elimination and have achieved "cockroach
to resemble a human, can
intelligence." They noted that self-awareness as
appear comforting to some
depicted in science-ﬁction is probably unlikely, but
people and disturbing to
that there were other potential hazards and
others[105]
pitfalls.[112] Various media sources and scientiﬁc
groups have noted separate trends in diﬀering areas
which might together result in greater robotic functionalities and autonomy, and
which pose some inherent concerns.[114][115][116] In 2015, the Nao alderen robots
were shown to have a capability for a degree of self-awareness. Researchers at the
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute AI and Reasoning Lab in New York conducted an
experiment where a robot became aware of itself, and corrected its answer to a
question once it had realised this.[117]

Military robots
Some experts and academics have questioned the use of robots for military combat,
especially when such robots are given some degree of autonomous functions.[118]
There are also concerns about technology which might allow some armed robots to
be controlled mainly by other robots.[119] The US Navy has funded a report which
indicates that, as military robots become more complex, there should be greater
attention to implications of their ability to make autonomous decisions.[120][121] One
researcher states that autonomous robots might be more humane, as they could
make decisions more eﬀectively. However, other experts question this.[122]
One robot in particular, the EATR, has generated public concerns[123] over its fuel
source, as it can continually refuel itself using organic substances.[124] Although the
engine for the EATR is designed to run on biomass and vegetation[125] speciﬁcally
selected by its sensors, which it can ﬁnd on battleﬁelds or other local environments,
the project has stated that chicken fat can also be used.[126]
Manuel De Landa has noted that "smart missiles" and autonomous bombs equipped
with artiﬁcial perception can be considered robots, as they make some of their
decisions autonomously. He believes this represents an important and dangerous
trend in which humans are handing over important decisions to machines.[127]

Relationship to unemployment
For centuries, people have predicted that machines would make workers obsolete
and increase unemployment, although the causes of unemployment are usually
thought to be due to social policy.[128]
A recent example of human replacement involves Taiwanese technology company
Foxconn who, in July 2011, announced a three-year plan to replace workers with
more robots. At present the company uses ten thousand robots but will increase
them to a million robots over a three-year period.[129]
Lawyers have speculated that an increased prevalence of robots in the workplace
could lead to the need to improve redundancy laws.[130]
Kevin J. Delaney said "Robots are taking human jobs. But Bill Gates believes that
governments should tax companies’ use of them, as a way to at least temporarily
slow the spread of automation and to fund other types of employment."[131] The
robot tax would also help pay a guaranteed living wage to the displaced workers.
The World Bank's World Development Report 2019 puts forth evidence showing that
while automation displaces workers, technological innovation creates more new
industries and jobs on balance.[132]

Contemporary uses
At present, there are two main types of robots, based on their
use: general-purpose autonomous robots and dedicated robots.
Robots can be classiﬁed by their speciﬁcity of purpose. A robot
might be designed to perform one particular task extremely
well, or a range of tasks less well. All robots by their nature
can be re-programmed to behave diﬀerently, but some are
limited by their physical form. For example, a factory robot
arm can perform jobs such as cutting, welding, gluing, or
acting as a fairground ride, while a pick-and-place robot can
only populate printed circuit boards.

General-purpose autonomous robots
General-purpose autonomous robots can perform a variety of
A general-purpose
functions independently. General-purpose autonomous robots
robot acts as a
typically can navigate independently in known spaces, handle
guide during the day
their own re-charging needs, interface with electronic doors
and a security guard
and elevators and perform other basic tasks. Like computers,
at night.
general-purpose robots can link with networks, software and
accessories that increase their usefulness. They may recognize
people or objects, talk, provide companionship, monitor
environmental quality, respond to alarms, pick up supplies and perform other useful
tasks. General-purpose robots may perform a variety of functions simultaneously or
they may take on diﬀerent roles at diﬀerent times of day. Some such robots try to
mimic human beings and may even resemble people in appearance; this type of robot

is called a humanoid robot. Humanoid robots are still in a very limited stage, as no
humanoid robot can, as of yet, actually navigate around a room that it has never
been in. Thus, humanoid robots are really quite limited, despite their intelligent
behaviors in their well-known environments.

Factory robots
Car production
Over the last three decades, automobile factories have become dominated by robots.
A typical factory contains hundreds of industrial robots working on fully automated
production lines, with one robot for every ten human workers. On an automated
production line, a vehicle chassis on a conveyor is welded, glued, painted and ﬁnally
assembled at a sequence of robot stations.
Packaging
Industrial robots are also used extensively for palletizing and packaging of
manufactured goods, for example for rapidly taking drink cartons from the end of a
conveyor belt and placing them into boxes, or for loading and unloading machining
centers.
Electronics
Mass-produced printed circuit boards (PCBs) are almost exclusively manufactured by
pick-and-place robots, typically with SCARA manipulators, which remove tiny
electronic components from strips or trays, and place them on to PCBs with great
accuracy.[133] Such robots can place hundreds of thousands of components per hour,
far out-performing a human in speed, accuracy, and reliability.[134]
Automated guided vehicles (AGVs)
Mobile robots, following markers or wires in the ﬂoor, or using vision[84] or lasers,
are used to transport goods around large facilities, such as warehouses, container
ports, or hospitals.[135]
Early AGV-style robots
Limited to tasks that could be accurately deﬁned and had to be performed the same
way every time. Very little feedback or intelligence was required, and the robots
needed only the most basic exteroceptors (sensors). The limitations of these AGVs
are that their paths are not easily altered and they cannot alter their paths if
obstacles block them. If one AGV breaks down, it may stop the entire operation.
Interim AGV technologies

Developed to deploy triangulation from beacons or bar code
grids for scanning on the ﬂoor or ceiling. In most factories,
triangulation systems tend to require moderate to high
maintenance, such as daily cleaning of all beacons or bar
codes. Also, if a tall pallet or large vehicle blocks beacons
or a bar code is marred, AGVs may become lost. Often such
AGVs are designed to be used in human-free environments.
Intelligent AGVs (i-AGVs)
Such as SmartLoader,[136] SpeciMinder,[137] ADAM,[138]
Tug[139] Eskorta,[140] and MT 400 with Motivity[141] are
designed for people-friendly workspaces. They navigate by
recognizing natural features. 3D scanners or other means
An intelligent AGV dropsof sensing the environment in two or three dimensions help
oﬀ goods without
to eliminate cumulative errors in dead-reckoning
needing lines or beacons
calculations of the AGV's current position. Some AGVs can
in the workspace.
create maps of their environment using scanning lasers
with simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and
use those maps to navigate in real time with other path planning and obstacle
avoidance algorithms. They are able to operate in complex environments and
perform non-repetitive and non-sequential tasks such as transporting photomasks in
a semiconductor lab, specimens in hospitals and goods in warehouses. For dynamic
areas, such as warehouses full of pallets, AGVs require additional strategies using
three-dimensional sensors such as time-of-ﬂight or stereovision cameras.

Dirty, dangerous, dull or inaccessible tasks
There are many jobs which humans would rather leave to robots. The job may be
boring, such as domestic cleaning or sports ﬁeld line marking, or dangerous, such as
exploring inside a volcano.[142] Other jobs are physically inaccessible, such as
exploring another planet,[143] cleaning the inside of a long pipe, or performing
laparoscopic surgery.[144]
Space probes
Almost every unmanned space probe ever launched was a robot.[145][146] Some were
launched in the 1960s with very limited abilities, but their ability to ﬂy and land (in
the case of Luna 9) is an indication of their status as a robot. This includes the
Voyager probes and the Galileo probes, among others.
Telerobots
Teleoperated robots, or telerobots, are devices remotely operated from a distance by
a human operator rather than following a predetermined sequence of movements,
but which has semi-autonomous behaviour. They are used when a human cannot be
present on site to perform a job because it is dangerous, far away, or inaccessible.
The robot may be in another room or another country, or may be on a very diﬀerent
scale to the operator. For instance, a laparoscopic surgery robot allows the surgeon
to work inside a human patient on a relatively small scale compared to open surgery,

signiﬁcantly shortening recovery time.[144] They can
also be used to avoid exposing workers to the
hazardous and tight spaces such as in duct cleaning.
When disabling a bomb, the operator sends a small
robot to disable it. Several authors have been using a
device called the Longpen to sign books remotely.[147]
Teleoperated robot aircraft, like the Predator
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, are increasingly being used
by the military. These pilotless drones can search
terrain and ﬁre on targets.[148][149] Hundreds of
robots such as iRobot's Packbot and the Foster-Miller
TALON are being used in Iraq and Afghanistan by the
U.S. military to defuse roadside bombs or improvised
explosive devices (IEDs) in an activity known as
explosive ordnance disposal (EOD).[150]

A U.S. Marine Corps technician
prepares to use a telerobot to
detonate a buried improvised
explosive device near Camp
Fallujah, Iraq.

Automated fruit harvesting machines
Robots are used to automate picking fruit on orchards at a cost lower than that of
human pickers.
Domestic robots
Domestic robots are simple robots dedicated to a
single task work in home use. They are used in simple
but often disliked jobs, such as vacuum cleaning, ﬂoor
washing, and lawn mowing. An example of a domestic
robot is a Roomba.

Military robots
Military robots include the SWORDS robot which is
currently used in ground-based combat. It can use a
variety of weapons and there is some discussion of
giving it some degree of autonomy in battleground
situations.[151][152][153]

The Roomba domestic vacuum
cleaner robot does a single,
menial job

Unmanned combat air vehicles (UCAVs), which are an
upgraded form of UAVs, can do a wide variety of missions, including combat. UCAVs
are being designed such as the BAE Systems Mantis which would have the ability to
ﬂy themselves, to pick their own course and target, and to make most decisions on
their own.[154] The BAE Taranis is a UCAV built by Great Britain which can ﬂy across
continents without a pilot and has new means to avoid detection.[155] Flight trials are
expected to begin in 2011.[156]
The AAAI has studied this topic in depth[106] and its president has commissioned a
study to look at this issue.[157]

Some have suggested a need to build "Friendly AI", meaning that the advances
which are already occurring with AI should also include an eﬀort to make AI
intrinsically friendly and humane.[158] Several such measures reportedly already
exist, with robot-heavy countries such as Japan and South Korea[159] having begun to
pass regulations requiring robots to be equipped with safety systems, and possibly
sets of 'laws' akin to Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics.[160][161] An oﬀicial report was
issued in 2009 by the Japanese government's Robot Industry Policy Committee.[162]
Chinese oﬀicials and researchers have issued a report suggesting a set of ethical
rules, and a set of new legal guidelines referred to as "Robot Legal Studies."[163]
Some concern has been expressed over a possible occurrence of robots telling
apparent falsehoods.[164]

Mining robots
Mining robots are designed to solve a number of problems currently facing the
mining industry, including skills shortages, improving productivity from declining ore
grades, and achieving environmental targets. Due to the hazardous nature of mining,
in particular underground mining, the prevalence of autonomous, semi-autonomous,
and tele-operated robots has greatly increased in recent times. A number of vehicle
manufacturers provide autonomous trains, trucks and loaders that will load material,
transport it on the mine site to its destination, and unload without requiring human
intervention. One of the world's largest mining corporations, Rio Tinto, has recently
expanded its autonomous truck ﬂeet to the world's largest, consisting of 150
autonomous Komatsu trucks, operating in Western Australia.[165] Similarly, BHP has
announced the expansion of its autonomous drill ﬂeet to the world's largest, 21
autonomous Atlas Copco drills.[166]
Drilling, longwall and rockbreaking machines are now also available as autonomous
robots.[167] The Atlas Copco Rig Control System can autonomously execute a drilling
plan on a drilling rig, moving the rig into position using GPS, set up the drill rig and
drill down to speciﬁed depths.[168] Similarly, the Transmin Rocklogic system can
automatically plan a path to position a rockbreaker at a selected destination.[169]
These systems greatly enhance the safety and eﬀiciency of mining operations.

Healthcare
Robots in healthcare have two main functions. Those which assist an individual, such
as a suﬀerer of a disease like Multiple Sclerosis, and those which aid in the overall
systems such as pharmacies and hospitals.
Home automation for the elderly and disabled
Robots used in home automation have developed over time from simple basic robotic
assistants, such as the Handy 1,[170] through to semi-autonomous robots, such as
FRIEND which can assist the elderly and disabled with common tasks.
The population is aging in many countries, especially Japan, meaning that there are
increasing numbers of elderly people to care for, but relatively fewer young people to
care for them.[171][172] Humans make the best carers, but where they are
unavailable, robots are gradually being introduced.[173]

FRIEND is a semi-autonomous robot designed to
support disabled and elderly people in their daily life
activities, like preparing and serving a meal. FRIEND
make it possible for patients who are paraplegic, have
muscle diseases or serious paralysis (due to strokes
etc.), to perform tasks without help from other people
like therapists or nursing staﬀ.
Pharmacies
Script Pro manufactures a robot designed to help
pharmacies ﬁll prescriptions that consist of oral solids
or medications in pill form.[174] The pharmacist or
The Care-Providing Robot
pharmacy
technician
enters
the
prescription
FRIEND
information into its information system. The system,
upon determining whether or not the drug is in the
robot, will send the information to the robot for
ﬁlling. The robot has 3 diﬀerent size vials to ﬁll determined by the size of the pill.
The robot technician, user, or pharmacist determines the needed size of the vial
based on the tablet when the robot is stocked. Once the vial is ﬁlled it is brought up
to a conveyor belt that delivers it to a holder that spins the vial and attaches the
patient label. Afterwards it is set on another conveyor that delivers the patient's
medication vial to a slot labeled with the patient's name on an LED read out. The
pharmacist or technician then checks the contents of the vial to ensure it's the
correct drug for the correct patient and then seals the vials and sends it out front to
be picked up.
McKesson's Robot RX is another healthcare robotics product that helps pharmacies
dispense thousands of medications daily with little or no errors.[175] The robot can be
ten feet wide and thirty feet long and can hold hundreds of diﬀerent kinds of
medications and thousands of doses. The pharmacy saves many resources like staﬀ
members that are otherwise unavailable in a resource scarce industry. It uses an
electromechanical head coupled with a pneumatic system to capture each dose and
deliver it to its either stocked or dispensed location. The head moves along a single
axis while it rotates 180 degrees to pull the medications. During this process it uses
barcode technology to verify its pulling the correct drug. It then delivers the drug to
a patient speciﬁc bin on a conveyor belt. Once the bin is ﬁlled with all of the drugs
that a particular patient needs and that the robot stocks, the bin is then released and
returned out on the conveyor belt to a technician waiting to load it into a cart for
delivery to the ﬂoor.

Research robots
While most robots today are installed in factories or homes, performing labour or life
saving jobs, many new types of robot are being developed in laboratories around the
world. Much of the research in robotics focuses not on speciﬁc industrial tasks, but
on investigations into new types of robot, alternative ways to think about or design
robots, and new ways to manufacture them. It is expected that these new types of
robot will be able to solve real world problems when they are ﬁnally realized.

Bionic and biomimetic robots
One approach to designing robots is to base them on animals. BionicKangaroo was
designed and engineered by studying and applying the physiology and methods of
locomotion of a kangaroo.
Nanorobots
Nanorobotics is the emerging technology ﬁeld of creating machines or robots whose
components are at or close to the microscopic scale of a nanometer (10−9 meters).
Also known as "nanobots" or "nanites", they would be constructed from molecular
machines. So far, researchers have mostly produced only parts of these complex
systems, such as bearings, sensors, and synthetic molecular motors, but functioning
robots have also been made such as the entrants to the Nanobot Robocup
contest.[176] Researchers also hope to be able to create entire robots as small as
viruses or bacteria, which could perform tasks on a tiny scale. Possible applications
include micro surgery (on the level of individual cells), utility fog,[177] manufacturing,
weaponry and cleaning.[178] Some people have suggested that if there were nanobots
which could reproduce, the earth would turn into "grey goo", while others argue that
this hypothetical outcome is nonsense.[179][180]
Reconﬁgurable robots
A few researchers have investigated the possibility of creating robots which can alter
their physical form to suit a particular task,[181] like the ﬁctional T-1000. Real robots
are nowhere near that sophisticated however, and mostly consist of a small number
of cube shaped units, which can move relative to their neighbours. Algorithms have
been designed in case any such robots become a reality.[182]
Soft-bodied robots
Robots with silicone bodies and ﬂexible actuators (air muscles, electroactive
polymers, and ferroﬂuids) look and feel diﬀerent from robots with rigid skeletons,
and can have diﬀerent behaviors.[183] Soft, ﬂexible (and sometimes even squishy)
robots are often designed to mimic the biomechanics of animals and other things
found in nature, which is leading to new applications in medicine, care giving, search
and rescue, food handling and manufacturing, and scientiﬁc exploration.[184][185]
Swarm robots
Inspired by colonies of insects such as ants and bees, researchers are modeling the
behavior of swarms of thousands of tiny robots which together perform a useful task,
such as ﬁnding something hidden, cleaning, or spying. Each robot is quite simple,
but the emergent behavior of the swarm is more complex. The whole set of robots
can be considered as one single distributed system, in the same way an ant colony
can be considered a superorganism, exhibiting swarm intelligence. The largest
swarms so far created include the iRobot swarm, the SRI/MobileRobots CentiBots
project[186] and the Open-source Micro-robotic Project swarm, which are being used
to research collective behaviors.[187][188] Swarms are also more resistant to failure.

Whereas one large robot may fail and ruin a mission, a swarm can continue even if
several robots fail. This could make them attractive for space exploration missions,
where failure is normally extremely costly.[189]
Haptic interface robots
Robotics also has application in the design of virtual reality interfaces. Specialized
robots are in widespread use in the haptic research community. These robots, called
"haptic interfaces", allow touch-enabled user interaction with real and virtual
environments. Robotic forces allow simulating the mechanical properties of "virtual"
objects, which users can experience through their sense of touch.[190]

Contemporary art and sculpture
Robots are used by contemporary artists to create works that include mechanical
automation. There are many branches of robotic art, one of which is robotic
installation art, a type of installation art that is programmed to respond to viewer
interactions, by means of computers, sensors and actuators. The future behavior of
such installations can therefore be altered by input from either the artist or the
participant, which diﬀerentiates these artworks from other types of kinetic art.
Le Grand Palais in Paris organized an exhibition "Artists & Robots", featuring
artworks created by more than forty artists with the help of robots in 2018.[191]

Robots in popular culture
Literature
Robotic characters, androids (artiﬁcial men/women)
or gynoids (artiﬁcial women), and cyborgs (also
"bionic men/women", or humans with signiﬁcant
mechanical enhancements) have become a staple of
science ﬁction.
The ﬁrst reference in Western literature to
mechanical servants appears in Homer's Iliad. In
Book XVIII, Hephaestus, god of ﬁre, creates new
Toy robots on display at the
armor for the hero Achilles, assisted by robots.[192]
Museo del Objeto del Objeto in
According
to
the
Rieu
translation,
"Golden
Mexico City.
maidservants hastened to help their master. They
looked like real women and could not only speak and
use their limbs but were endowed with intelligence
and trained in handwork by the immortal gods." The words "robot" or "android" are
not used to describe them, but they are nevertheless mechanical devices human in
appearance. "The ﬁrst use of the word Robot was in Karel Čapek's play R.U.R.
(Rossum's Universal Robots) (written in 1920)". Writer Karel Čapek was born in
Czechoslovakia (Czech Republic).

Possibly the most proliﬁc author of the twentieth century was Isaac Asimov (1920–
1992)[193] who published over ﬁve-hundred books.[194] Asimov is probably best
remembered for his science-ﬁction stories and especially those about robots, where
he placed robots and their interaction with society at the center of many of his
works.[195][196] Asimov carefully considered the problem of the ideal set of
instructions robots might be given in order to lower the risk to humans, and arrived
at his Three Laws of Robotics: a robot may not injure a human being or, through
inaction, allow a human being to come to harm; a robot must obey orders given it by
human beings, except where such orders would conﬂict with the First Law; and a
robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conﬂict with
the First or Second Law.[197] These were introduced in his 1942 short story
"Runaround", although foreshadowed in a few earlier stories. Later, Asimov added
the Zeroth Law: "A robot may not harm humanity, or, by inaction, allow humanity to
come to harm"; the rest of the laws are modiﬁed sequentially to acknowledge this.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the ﬁrst passage in Asimov's short story
"Liar!" (1941) that mentions the First Law is the earliest recorded use of the word
robotics. Asimov was not initially aware of this; he assumed the word already existed
by analogy with mechanics, hydraulics, and other similar terms denoting branches of
applied knowledge.[198]

Films
Robots appear in many ﬁlms. Most of the robots in cinema are ﬁctional. Two of the
most famous are R2-D2 and C-3PO from the Star Wars franchise.

Sex robots
The concept of humanoid sex robots has elicited both public attention and concern.
Opponents of the concept have stated that the development of sex robots would be
morally wrong.[199][200][201][202] They argue that the introduction of such devices
would be socially harmful, and demeaning to women and children.[200]

Problems depicted in popular culture
Fears and concerns about robots have been
repeatedly expressed in a wide range of books and
ﬁlms. A common theme is the development of a
master race of conscious and highly intelligent
robots, motivated to take over or destroy the human
race. Frankenstein (1818), often called the ﬁrst
science ﬁction novel, has become synonymous with
the theme of a robot or android advancing beyond its
creator.
Other works with similar themes include The
Mechanical
Man,
The
Terminator,
Runaway,
RoboCop, the Replicators in Stargate, the Cylons in
Battlestar Galactica, the Cybermen and Daleks in
Doctor Who, The Matrix, Enthiran and I, Robot. Some

Italian movie The Mechanical
Man (1921), the ﬁrst ﬁlm to
have shown a battle between
robots.

ﬁctional robots are programmed to kill and destroy; others gain superhuman
intelligence and abilities by upgrading their own software and hardware. Examples
of popular media where the robot becomes evil are 2001: A Space Odyssey, Red
Planet and Enthiran.
The 2017 game Horizon Zero Dawn explores themes of robotics in warfare, robot
ethics, and the AI control problem, as well as the positive or negative impact such
technologies could have on the environment.
Another common theme is the reaction, sometimes called the "uncanny valley", of
unease and even revulsion at the sight of robots that mimic humans too closely.[105]
More recently, ﬁctional representations of artiﬁcially intelligent robots in ﬁlms such
as A.I. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Ex Machina and the 2016 TV adaptation of
Westworld have engaged audience sympathy for the robots themselves.

See also
Index of robotics articles
Outline of robotics
Artiﬁcial intelligence
William Grey Walter

Speciﬁc robotics concepts
Robot locomotion
Simultaneous localization and mapping
Tactile sensor
Teleoperation
Uncanny valley
von Neumann machine
Wake-up robot problem
Neuromorphic engineering

Robotics methods and categories
Cognitive robotics
Companion robot
Domestic robot
Epigenetic robotics
Evolutionary robotics
Humanoid robot
Autonomous robot
Microbotics
Robot control

Speciﬁc robots and devices
AIBO
Autonomous spaceport drone ship
Driverless car
Friendly Robotics
Lely Juno family
Liquid handling robot
PatrolBot
RoboBee
Roborior
Robot App Store

Other related articles
Unmanned vehicle
Remote control vehicle
Automated guided vehicle

References
1. "Four-legged Robot, 'Cheetah,' Sets New Speed Record" (https://www.huﬃngtonpos
t.com/2012/03/06/four-legged-robot-sets-new-speed-record_n_1324701.html).
Reuters. 2012-03-06. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20131022173838/htt
p://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/2012/03/06/four-legged-robot-sets-new-speed-record_
n_1324701.html) from the original on 2013-10-22. Retrieved 2013-10-05.
2. Deﬁnition of 'robot'. Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved November 27, 2016.
3. https://www.conres.com/it-products-solutions/news-events/top-10-tech-trendsautonomous-agents-things/ Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2017041914535
8/https://www.conres.com/it-products-solutions/news-events/top-10-tech-trends-aut
onomous-agents-things/) 2017-04-19 at the Wayback Machine retrieved April 18,
2017
4. "Forecasts - Driverless car market watch" (http://www.driverless-future.com/?page_
id=384). www.driverless-future.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201704
19100926/http://www.driverless-future.com/?page_id=384) from the original on
2017-04-19. Retrieved 2017-04-18.
5. "robotics" (http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/view/entry/m_en_gb0714530#m_en_
gb0714530). Oxford Dictionaries. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110518
152729/http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/view/entry/m_en_gb0714530#m_en_gb
0714530) from the original on 18 May 2011. Retrieved 4 February 2011.
6. Ivan Margolius,'The Robot of Prague', Newsletter, The Friends of Czech Heritage no.
17, Autumn 2017, pp. 3 - 6.
https://czechfriends.net/images/RobotsMargoliusJul2017.pdf Archived (https://web.
archive.org/web/20170911115134/https://czechfriends.net/images/RobotsMargoliu
sJul2017.pdf) 2017-09-11 at the Wayback Machine
7. Karel Capek – Who did actually invent the word "robot" and what does it mean? (ht
tp://capek.misto.cz/english/robot.html) at capek.misto.cz – archive (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20130123023343/http://capek.misto.cz/english/robot.html)

8. Kurfess, Thomas R. (1 January 2005). Robotics and Automation Handbook (https://b
ooks.google.com/books?id=stIWUpWvI94C). Taylor & Francis.
ISBN 9780849318047. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20161204234831/htt
ps://books.google.com/books?id=stIWUpWvI94C) from the original on 4 December
2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016 – via Google Books.
9. Pearce, Jeremy. "George C. Devol, Inventor of Robot Arm, Dies at 99" (https://www.
nytimes.com/2011/08/16/business/george-devol-developer-of-robot-arm-dies-at-99.
html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20161225221153/http://www.nytimes.
com/2011/08/16/business/george-devol-developer-of-robot-arm-dies-at-99.html)
2016-12-25 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, August 15, 2011.
Retrieved February 7, 2012. "In 1961, General Motors put the ﬁrst Unimate arm on
an assembly line at the company's plant in Ewing Township, N.J., a suburb of
Trenton. The device was used to lift and stack die-cast metal parts taken hot from
their molds."
10. Akins, Crystal. "5 jobs being replaced by robots" (https://web.archive.org/web/2013
0424145057/http://excelle.monster.com/beneﬁts/articles/4983-5-jobs-being-replac
ed-by-robots?page=1). Excelle. Monster. Archived from the original (http://excelle.
monster.com/beneﬁts/articles/4983-5-jobs-being-replaced-by-robots?page=1) on
2013-04-24. Retrieved 2013-04-15.
11. Hoy, Greg (28 May 2014). "Robots could cost Australian economy 5 million jobs,
experts warn, as companies look to cut costs" (http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-0
5-28/robots-could-cost-australian-economy-5-million-jobs-expert-says/5484740).
ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20140529095011/http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-05-28/robots-could-cost-a
ustralian-economy-5-million-jobs-expert-says/5484740) from the original on 29
May 2014. Retrieved 29 May 2014.
12. "Telecom glossary "bot" " (https://web.archive.org/web/20070202121608/http://ww
w.atis.org/tg2k/_bot.html). Alliance for Telecommunications Solutions. 2001-02-28.
Archived from the original (http://www.atis.org/tg2k/_bot.html) on 2007-02-02.
Retrieved 2007-09-05.
13. Polk, Igor (2005-11-16). "RoboNexus 2005 robot exhibition virtual tour" (http://ww
w.virtuar.com/click/2005/robonexus/index.htm). Robonexus Exhibition 2005.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20070812071030/http://www.virtuar.com/cli
ck/2005/robonexus/index.htm) from the original on 2007-08-12. Retrieved
2007-09-10.
14. Harris, Tom (2002-04-16). "How Robots Work" (http://science.howstuﬀworks.com/ro
bot.htm). How Stuﬀ Works. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2007082621364
0/http://science.howstuﬀworks.com/robot.htm) from the original on 2007-08-26.
Retrieved 2007-09-10.
15. Needham, Joseph (1991). Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 2, History of
Scientiﬁc Thought. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-05800-1.
16. Currie, Adam (1999). "The History of Robotics" (https://web.archive.org/web/20060
718024255/http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~currie/roboadam.htm). Archived from the
original (http://www.faculty.ucr.edu/~currie/roboadam.htm) on 18 July 2006.
Retrieved 2007-09-10.
17. Noct. Att. L. 10
18. Needham, Volume 2, 54.
19. Deborah Levine Gera (2003). Ancient Greek Ideas on Speech, Language, and
Civilization (https://books.google.com/books?id=h5tKJvApybsC&pg=PA114&lpg=PA
114&dq=hephaestus+handmaidens). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19925616-7. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20161205062218/https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=h5tKJvApybsC&pg=PA114&lpg=PA114&dq=hephaestus+han
dmaidens) from the original on 2016-12-05. Retrieved 2016-09-25.

20. Mark E. Rosheim (1994). "Robot evolution: the development of anthrobotics (http
s://archive.org/details/robotevolutionde0000rosh) Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20161205085645/https://books.google.com/books?id=IxtL54iiDPUC&pg=&d
q&hl=en#v=onepage&q=&f=false) 2016-12-05 at the Wayback Machine". p.2.
Wiley-IEEE. ISBN 0-471-02622-0
21. "Robots then and now (http://news.bbc.co.uk/cbbcnews/hi/ﬁnd_out/guides/tech/rob
ots/newsid_3914000/3914569.stm) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2010122
0114656/http://news.bbc.co.uk/cbbcnews/hi/ﬁnd_out/guides/tech/robots/newsid_39
14000/3914569.stm) 2010-12-20 at the Wayback Machine". BBC.
22. O'Connor, J.J. and E.F. Robertson. "Heron biography" (http://www-history.mcs.st-and
rews.ac.uk/history/Biographies/Heron.html). The MacTutor History of Mathematics
archive. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20080624013623/http://www-histor
y.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/history/Biographies/Heron.html) from the original on 200806-24. Retrieved 2008-09-05.
23. Strong 2007, p. 143.
24. Strong 2007, p. 133-134.
25. Fowler, Charles B. (October 1967). "The Museum of Music: A History of Mechanical
Instruments". Music Educators Journal. 54 (2): 45–49. doi:10.2307/3391092 (http
s://doi.org/10.2307%2F3391092). JSTOR 3391092 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/339
1092).
26. "Earliest Clocks" (https://web.archive.org/web/20080531063139/http://physics.nist.
gov/GenInt/Time/early.html). A Walk Through Time. NIST Physics Laboratory.
Archived from the original (http://physics.nist.gov/GenInt/Time/early.html) on 200805-31. Retrieved 2008-08-11.
27. "The programmable robot of ancient Greece". New Scientist: 32–35. July 6, 2007.
28. Varadpande, Manohar Laxman (1987). History of Indian Theatre, Volume 1 (https://
books.google.com/books?id=SyxOHOCVcVkC&pg=PA68). p. 68.
ISBN 9788170172215.
29. Wujastyk, Dominik (2003). The Roots of Ayurveda: Selections from Sanskrit Medical
Writings (https://books.google.com/books?id=TaZCwjtmzZYC&pg=PA222&dq=auto
mata#v=onepage&q=automata&f=false). p. 222. ISBN 9780140448245.
30. Needham, Joseph (1965). Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 4, Physics and
Physical Technology Part 2, Mechanical Engineering (https://books.google.com/boo
ks?id=SeGyrCfYs2AC&pg=PA164&dq=bhoja+automata). p. 164.
ISBN 9780521058032.
31. "Al-Jazarī | Arab inventor" (https://www.britannica.com/biography/al-Jazari).
Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2019-06-15.
32. Howard R. Turner (1997), Science in Medieval Islam: An Illustrated Introduction, p.
81, University of Texas Press, ISBN 0-292-78149-0
33. Donald Hill, "Mechanical Engineering in the Medieval Near East", Scientiﬁc
American, May 1991, pp. 64-9 (cf. Donald Hill, Mechanical Engineering (http://hom
e.swipnet.se/islam/articles/HistoryofSciences.htm) Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20071225091836/http://home.swipnet.se/islam/articles/HistoryofSciences.ht
m) 25 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine)
34. Ancient Discoveries Islamic Science Part1 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2H
cjanNWFM), retrieved 2019-06-15
35. Rosheim, Mark E. (1994). Robot Evolution: The Development of Anthrobotics (http
s://archive.org/details/robotevolutionde0000rosh). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0471-02622-8.

36. Rosheim, Mark E. (1994), Robot Evolution: The Development of Anthrobotics (http
s://archive.org/details/robotevolutionde0000rosh/page/9), Wiley-IEEE, p. 9 (https://a
rchive.org/details/robotevolutionde0000rosh/page/9), ISBN 0-471-02622-0
37. Moran, M. E. (December 2006). "The da Vinci robot". J. Endourol. 20 (12): 986–90.
doi:10.1089/end.2006.20.986 (https://doi.org/10.1089%2Fend.2006.20.986).
PMID 17206888 (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17206888). "... the date of the
design and possible construction of this robot was 1495 ... Beginning in the 1950s,
investigators at the University of California began to ponder the signiﬁcance of
some of da Vinci's markings on what appeared to be technical drawings ... It is now
known that da Vinci's robot would have had the outer appearance of a Germanic
knight."
38. "Leonardo da Vinci's Robots" (http://www.leonardo3.net/leonardo/books%20I%20ro
bot%20di%20Leonardo%20-%20Taddei%20Mario%20-%20english%20Leonardo%2
0robots%201.html). Leonardo3.net. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/200809
24162924/http://www.leonardo3.net/leonardo/books%20I%20robot%20di%20Leona
rdo%20-%20Taddei%20Mario%20-%20english%20Leonardo%20robots%201.html)
from the original on 2008-09-24. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
39. Jane Marie Law, Puppets of Nostalgia – The Life, Death and Rebirth of the Japanese
Awaji Ningyo Tradition, 1997, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-02894-1
40. Wood, Gabby. "Living Dolls: A Magical History Of The Quest For Mechanical Life" (ht
tps://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/16/extract.gabywood) Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20161220154456/https://www.theguardian.com/books/200
2/feb/16/extract.gabywood) 2016-12-20 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian,
2002-02-16.
41. Edwyn Gray, Nineteenth-century torpedoes and their inventors, page 18
42. Gray, Edwyn (2004). Nineteenth-Century Torpedoes and Their Inventors. Naval
Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-341-3.
43. Marc Seifer Life and Times of Nikola Tesla, page 1893 google books (https://books.g
oogle.com/books?id=DzMR8x_rbPgC&printsec=frontcover&dq=tesla+torpedo+con
trolled+wireless+conduction&hl=en&sa=X&ei=-669Uv3NO46-sQSysYGgDQ&ved=
0CEIQ6AEwAjgK#v=onepage&q=torpedo&f=false) Archived (https://web.archive.o
rg/web/20161205023226/https://books.google.com/books?id=DzMR8x_rbPgC&prin
tsec=frontcover&dq=tesla+torpedo+controlled+wireless+conduction&hl=en&sa=
X&ei=-669Uv3NO46-sQSysYGgDQ&ved=0CEIQ6AEwAjgK#v=onepage&q=torpedo
&f=false) 2016-12-05 at the Wayback Machine
44. Benjamin Franklin Miessner, Radiodynamics: The Wireless Control of Torpedoes and
Other Mechanisms, D. Van Nostrand Company, 1916, page 83
45. US 613809 (https://worldwide.espacenet.com/textdoc?DB=EPODOC&IDX=US6138
09)
46. "Tesla – Master of Lightning" (https://www.pbs.org/tesla). PBS.org. Archived (https://
web.archive.org/web/20080928061709/http://www.pbs.org/tesla) from the original
on 2008-09-28. Retrieved 2008-09-24.
47. "Merriam-Webster Dictionary : robot" (https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
robot). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170307044859/https://www.merria
m-webster.com/dictionary/robot) from the original on 2017-03-07. Retrieved
2017-03-06. "Origin: Czech, from robota, compulsory labor"
48. "Science Diction: The Origin Of The Word 'Robot' " (https://www.npr.org/2011/04/22/
135634400/science-diction-the-origin-of-the-word-robot). Archived (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20180417022654/https://www.npr.org/2011/04/22/135634400/scienc
e-diction-the-origin-of-the-word-robot) from the original on 2018-04-17. Retrieved
2018-04-05.

49. "Hank Green's First Novel Is An Absolutely Remarkable Thing" (https://www.indiana
polismonthly.com/arts-and-culture/books-tv-and-radio/hank-greens-ﬁrst-novel-is-an
-absolutely-remarkable-thing). Indianapolis Monthly. 2018-10-01. Retrieved
2019-11-20.
50. "You Are Pronouncing the Word "Robot" Wrong" (https://www.dailykos.com/story/20
17/10/30/1710902/-You-Are-Pronouncing-the-Word-Robot-Wrong) . Daily Kos.
Retrieved 2019-11-20.
51. "AH Reﬀell & Eric Robot (1928)" (https://web.archive.org/web/20131111132524/htt
p://www.reﬀell.org.uk/people/ericrobot.php). Archived from the original (http://ww
w.reﬀell.org.uk/people/ericrobot.php) on 2013-11-11. Retrieved 2013-11-11.
52. "Meet Mr. Robot – Not Forgetting His Master" (https://web.archive.org/web/2017030
7205535/http://cyberneticzoo.com/robots/1932-%E2%80%93-george-robot-%E2%8
0%93-capt-w-h-richards-british/). The Age. 20 September 1935. Archived from the
original (http://cyberneticzoo.com/robots/1932-%E2%80%93-george-robot-%E2%8
0%93-capt-w-h-richards-british/) on 2017-03-07. Retrieved 7 March 2017.
53. "Robot Dreams : The Strange Tale Of A Man's Quest To Rebuild His Mechanical
Childhood Friend" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100115065601/http://www.freeti
mes.com/stories/13/35/robot-dreams-the-strange-tale-of-a-mans-quest-to-rebuild-h
is-mechanical-childhood-friend). The Cleveland Free Times. Archived from the
original (http://www.freetimes.com/stories/13/35/robot-dreams-the-strange-tale-ofa-mans-quest-to-rebuild-his-mechanical-childhood-friend) on 15 January 2010.
Retrieved 2008-09-25.
54. Scott Schaut (2006). Robots of Westinghouse: 1924-Today . Mansﬁeld Memorial
Museum. ISBN 978-0-9785844-1-2.
55. Owen Holland. "The Grey Walter Online Archive" (https://web.archive.org/web/2008
1009055230/http://www.ias.uwe.ac.uk/Robots/gwonline/gwonline.html). Archived
from the original (http://www.ias.uwe.ac.uk/Robots/gwonline/gwonline.html) on
2008-10-09. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
56. Waurzyniak, Patrick (July 2006). "Masters of Manufacturing: Joseph F. Engelberger"
(https://web.archive.org/web/20111109053615/http://www.sme.org/cgi-bin/ﬁnd-arti
cles.pl?&ME06ART39&ME&20060709). Society of Manufacturing Engineers. 137
(1). Archived from the original (http://www.sme.org/cgi-bin/ﬁnd-articles.pl?&ME06A
RT39&ME&20060709) on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
57. "Robot Hall of Fame – Unimate" (https://web.archive.org/web/20110926213115/htt
p://www.robothalloﬀame.org/unimate.html). Carnegie Mellon University. Archived
from the original (http://www.robothalloﬀame.org/unimate.html) on 26 September
2011. Retrieved 2008-08-28.
58. "National Inventor's Hall of Fame 2011 Inductee" (https://web.archive.org/web/201
41104234729/http://invent.org/inductee-detail/?IID=426). Invent Now. Archived
from the original (http://invent.org/inductee-detail/?IID=426) on 2014-11-04.
Retrieved 2011-03-18.
59. "Company History" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130204034959/http://www.fujiy
usoki.com/English/rekishi.htm). Fuji Yusoki Kogyo Co. Archived from the original (htt
p://www.fujiyusoki.com/English/rekishi.htm) on 4 February 2013. Retrieved
2008-09-12.
60. "KUKA Industrial Robot FAMULUS" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130610012645/h
ttp://www.kuka-robotics.com/germany/en/company/group/milestones/1973.htm).
Archived from the original (http://www.kuka-robotics.com/germany/en/company/gro
up/milestones/1973.htm) on June 10, 2013. Retrieved 2008-01-10.

61. "History of Industrial Robots" (https://web.archive.org/web/20121224213437/http://
www.ifr.org/uploads/media/History_of_Industrial_Robots_online_brochure_by_IFR_20
12.pdf) (PDF). Archived from the original (http://www.ifr.org/uploads/media/History_
of_Industrial_Robots_online_brochure_by_IFR_2012.pdf) (PDF) on 2012-12-24.
Retrieved 2012-10-27.
62. "History of Industrial Robots" (https://web.archive.org/web/20150708105337/http
s://www.robots.com/education/industrial-history). robots.com. Archived from the
original (https://www.robots.com/education/industrial-history) on 8 July 2015.
Retrieved 24 August 2015.
63. "About us" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140109062457/http://emrotechnologie
s.com/). Archived from the original (http://www.emrotechnologies.com/) on 201401-09.
64. "Archived copy" (https://web.archive.org/web/20151007014124/http://blog.codexif
y.com/2015/10/robohon-cute-little-robot-cum-smartphone.html). Archived from the
original (http://blog.codexify.com/2015/10/robohon-cute-little-robot-cum-smartphon
e.html) on 2015-10-07. Retrieved 2015-10-06.
65. Robots to get their own operating system (https://web.archive.org/web/200909180
55715/http://www.ethiopianreview.com/articles/23156), by Mehret Tesfaye Ethipian
Review, August 13, 2009.
66. Research and Development for Next-generation Service Robots in Japan (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20120723091926/http://ukinjapan.fco.gov.uk/resources/en/pdf/5
606907/5633632/next-generation-services-robots), United Kingdom Foreign
Ministry report, by Yumiko Moyen, Science and Innovation Section, British
Embassy, Tokyo, Japan, January 2009.
67. Robotic Tactile Sensing – Technologies and System (https://www.springer.com/engin
eering/robotics/book/978-94-007-0578-4). Springer.com. 2012-07-30.
ISBN 9789400705784. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20131229011744/htt
p://www.springer.com/engineering/robotics/book/978-94-007-0578-4) from the
original on 2013-12-29. Retrieved 2014-02-08.
68. Dahiya, Ravinder S.; Metta, Giorgio; Cannata, Giorgio; Valle, Maurizio (2011).
"Guest Editorial Special Issue on Robotic Sense of Touch" (https://semanticscholar.o
rg/paper/2d41ca7e86d59ﬀ5cb9c2138e2a87461d36bb4f0). IEEE Transactions on
Robotics. 27 (3): 385–388. doi:10.1109/TRO.2011.2155830 (https://doi.org/10.110
9%2FTRO.2011.2155830).
69. "Robotics in practice: Future capabilities" by Joseph F. Engelberger. in "Electronic
Servicing & Technology" magazine 1982 August.
70. The Caterpillar Self-Driving Dump Truck (http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/13
1/the-caterpillar-self-driving-dump-truck.html?nav=inform-rl) Archived (https://web.
archive.org/web/20110607062457/http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/131/thecaterpillar-self-driving-dump-truck.html?nav=inform-rl) 2011-06-07 at the Wayback
Machine, By Tim McKeough, Fast Company, November 25, 2008.
71. Self-Driving Trucks to Revolutionize Logistics, DHL Says (https://www.bloomberg.co
m/news/articles/2014-12-09/self-driving-trucks-to-revolutionize-logistics-dhl-says)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160722235005/http://www.bloomberg.co
m/news/articles/2014-12-09/self-driving-trucks-to-revolutionize-logistics-dhl-says)
2016-07-22 at the Wayback Machine, Richard Weiss, December 9, 2014.
72. VIDEO: Why Caterpillar’s autonomous mining tech is “completely diﬀerent from
anything” it’s ever done (http://www.equipmentworld.com/video-why-caterpillars-a
utonomous-mining-tech-is-completely-diﬀerent-from-anything-its-ever-done/)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160513040542/http://www.equipmentworl
d.com/video-why-caterpillars-autonomous-mining-tech-is-completely-diﬀerent-from
-anything-its-ever-done/) 2016-05-13 at the Wayback Machine Wayne Grayson |
October 16, 2014.

73. Self-driving dump trucks, automatic shovels coming to Australian mines (http://asi
a.nikkei.com/Business/Trends/Self-driving-dump-trucks-automatic-shovels-coming-t
o-Australian-mines) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160509210931/http://
asia.nikkei.com/Business/Trends/Self-driving-dump-trucks-automatic-shovels-comin
g-to-Australian-mines) 2016-05-09 at the Wayback Machine, KAORI TAKAHASHI,
April 23, 2015.
74. Forget self-driving Google cars, Australia has self-driving trucks (http://www.theag
e.com.au/it-pro/business-it/forget-selfdriving-google-cars-australia-has-selfdriving-t
rucks-20141020-118o47.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2016042622
1302/http://www.theage.com.au/it-pro/business-it/forget-selfdriving-google-cars-au
stralia-has-selfdriving-trucks-20141020-118o47.html) 2016-04-26 at the Wayback
Machine, by Matthew Hall, October 20, 2014.
75. Australian mining giant Rio Tinto is using these huge self-driving trucks to
transport iron ore (http://www.businessinsider.com/rio-tinto-using-self-driving-truck
s-to-transport-ore-2015-10?r=UK&IR=T) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201
60509125519/http://www.businessinsider.com/rio-tinto-using-self-driving-trucks-totransport-ore-2015-10?r=UK&IR=T) 2016-05-09 at the Wayback Machine, Charles
Clark, Oct. 19, 2015.
76. Daddy, What Was a Truck Driver? Over the Next Two Decades, the Machines
Themselves Will Take Over the Driving (https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014241
27887324144304578624221804774116) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20
170304131234/https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142412788732414430457862
4221804774116) 2017-03-04 at the Wayback Machine, By DENNIS K. BERMAN, July
23, 2013, wsj.com.
77. "Robot can read, learn like a human" (http://www.nbcnews.com/id/40534768). 6
December 2010. Retrieved 10 December 2010.
78. Robots: Brave New World moves a step closer (https://www.bbc.com/news/business
-20800118) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190114133009/https://www.b
bc.com/news/business-20800118) 2019-01-14 at the Wayback Machine, By James
Melik, Reporter, Business Daily, BBC World Service, 3 January 2013.
79. Zunt, Dominik. "Who did actually invent the word "robot" and what does it mean?"
(https://web.archive.org/web/20120204135259/http://capek.misto.cz/english/robot.
html). The Karel Čapek website. Archived from the original (http://capek.misto.cz/e
nglish/robot.html) on 2012-02-04. Retrieved 2007-09-11.
80. "Indo-European root *orbh-" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090124172123/http://
bartleby.com/61/roots/IE363.html). 2008-05-12. Archived from the original (http://w
ww.bartleby.com/61/roots/IE363.html) on January 24, 2009. Retrieved 2014-02-08.
81. "Online Etymology Dictionary" (http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?allowed_in_f
rame=0&search=robot&searchmode=or). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0131214120523/http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?allowed_in_frame=0&searc
h=robot&searchmode=or) from the original on 2013-12-14. Retrieved 2012-06-10.
82. Ranger, Steve. "Robots of death, robots of love: The reality of android soldiers and
why laws for robots are doomed to failure" (https://www.techrepublic.com/article/ro
bots-of-death-robots-of-love-the-reality-of-android-soldiers-and-why-laws-for-robotsare-doomed-to-failure/). TechRepublic. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2017
0127121914/http://www.techrepublic.com/article/robots-of-death-robots-of-love-the
-reality-of-android-soldiers-and-why-laws-for-robots-are-doomed-to-failure/) from
the original on 27 January 2017. Retrieved 21 January 2017.
83. Moubarak, Paul M.; Ben-Tzvi, Pinhas (2011). "Adaptive manipulation of a Hybrid
Mechanism Mobile Robot". 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Robotic and
Sensors Environments (ROSE). pp. 113–118. doi:10.1109/ROSE.2011.6058520 (htt
ps://doi.org/10.1109%2FROSE.2011.6058520). ISBN 978-1-4577-0819-0.

84. "Smart Caddy" (https://web.archive.org/web/20071011044450/http://www.smartca
ddy.net/). Seegrid. Archived from the original (http://www.smartcaddy.net) on 200710-11. Retrieved 2007-09-13.
85. Zhang, Gexiang; Pérez-Jiménez, Mario J.; Gheorghe, Marian (2017-04-05). Real-life
Applications with Membrane Computing (https://books.google.com/?id=Ge-cDgAAQ
BAJ&pg=PA224&dq=Mobile+robots+are+also+found+in+industry,+military+and
+security+environments.#v=onepage&q=Mobile%20robots%20are%20also%20fo
und%20in%20industry,%20military%20and%20security%20environments.&f=fals
e). Springer. ISBN 9783319559896.
86. "Deﬁnition of a robot" (https://web.archive.org/web/20070628064010/http://www.di
ra.dk/pdf/robotdef.pdf) (PDF). Dansk Robot Forening. Archived from the original (htt
p://www.dira.dk/pdf/robotdef.pdf) (PDF) on 2007-06-28. Retrieved 2007-09-10.
87. "Robotics-related Standards Sites" (https://web.archive.org/web/20060617082835/
http://www.euron.org/resources/standards.html). European Robotics Research
Network. Archived from the original (http://www.euron.org/resources/standards.htm
l) on 2006-06-17. Retrieved 2008-07-15.
88. Provisional deﬁnition of Service Robots (http://www.ifr.org/service-robots/) Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20100218054027/http://www.ifr.org/service-robots/)
2010-02-18 at the Wayback Machine, IFR, 27th of October 2012
89. Mitgang, Lee (October 25, 1983). " 'Nova's' 'Talking Turtle' Poﬁles High Priest of
School Computer Movement". Gainesville Sun.
90. Barnard, Jeﬀ (January 29, 1985). "Robots In School: Games Or Learning?" (https://n
ews.google.com/newspapers?id=W4diAAAAIBAJ&pg=1326,3744066&dq=logo+turt
le+robot&hl=en). Observer-Reporter. Washington. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20150922181442/https://news.google.com/newspapers?id=W4diAAAAIBAJ&
sjid=s3cNAAAAIBAJ&pg=1326,3744066&dq=logo+turtle+robot&hl=en) from the
original on September 22, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 2012.
91. "Education: Marvel of the Bronx" (http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,
9171,904056,00.html). Time. April 1974. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20
190524113018/http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,904056,00.h
tml) from the original on 2019-05-24. Retrieved 2019-05-19.
92. "Leachim Archives" (http://cyberneticzoo.com/tag/leachim/). cyberneticzoo.com.
2010-09-13. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190528193904/http://cybern
eticzoo.com/tag/leachim/) from the original on 2019-05-28. Retrieved 2019-05-29.
93. P. Moubarak, et al., Modular and Reconﬁgurable Mobile Robotics, Journal of
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 60 (12) (2012) 1648–1663.
94. Rédaction (December 25, 2011). "Le consortium franco-québécois Mix dévoile son
projet de voiture volante" (https://web.archive.org/web/20121006225358/http://ww
w.aerobuzz.fr/spip.php?article2346). aerobuzz.fr/ (in French). aerobuzz.fr. Archived
from the original (http://www.aerobuzz.fr/spip.php?article2346) on October 6,
2012. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
95. Scanlan, Steve, Robotics Design Inc., Montreal. "Modularity in robotics provides
automation for all" (http://www.ept.ca/issues/story.aspx?aid=1000348213).
Digital.ept.ca. Retrieved September 7, 2012.
96. Plumbing and HVAC, Magazine (April 2010). "Duct cleaning robots" (http://www.rob
oticsdesign.qc.ca/assets/Uploads/PDF-content/InThePress/HVAC/Pluming+HVACma
gazineapril2010.pdf) (PDF). roboticsdesign.qc.ca/news.html. plumbingandhvac.ca/.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130425130611/http://www.roboticsdesig
n.qc.ca/assets/Uploads/PDF-content/InThePress/HVAC/Pluming+HVACmagazineapril
2010.pdf) (PDF) from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2010.

97. "Universal Robots collaborate outside enclosures | Control Engineering" (http://ww
w.controleng.com/single-article/universal-robots-collaborate-outside-enclosures/83
cc537080cf25e043eb9b770fd1d62f.html). Controleng.com. February 2013.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130518134056/http://www.controleng.co
m/single-article/universal-robots-collaborate-outside-enclosures/83cc537080cf25e0
43eb9b770fd1d62f.html) from the original on 2013-05-18. Retrieved 2013-06-04.
98. "A Brief History of Collaborative Robots" (http://www.engineering.com/AdvancedMa
nufacturing/ArticleID/12169) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201606102023
19/http://www.engineering.com/AdvancedManufacturing/ArticleID/12169) 2016-0610 at the Wayback Machine Engineering.com, May 19, 2016
99. Hagerty, James (18 September 2012). "Baxter Robot Heads to Work' " (https://www.
wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390443720204578004441732584574). Wall
Street Journal. New York: Dow Jones & Company. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20150410052711/http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10000872396390443720204
578004441732584574) from the original on 10 April 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2014.
00. John Markoﬀ (September 18, 2012). "A Robot With a Reassuring Touch" (https://ww
w.nytimes.com/2012/09/18/science/a-robot-with-a-delicate-touch.html). The New
York Times. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120919015947/http://www.ny
times.com/2012/09/18/science/a-robot-with-a-delicate-touch.html) from the
original on September 19, 2012. Retrieved September 18, 2012.
01. "A Ping-Pong-Playing Terminator" (http://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2010-0
2/ping-pong-playing-terminator). Popular Science. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20110329123836/http://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2010-02/ping-p
ong-playing-terminator) from the original on 2011-03-29. Retrieved 2010-12-18.
02. "Best robot 2009" (https://web.archive.org/web/20120511033937/http://www.gadg
etrivia.com/8164-best_robot_international_robot_exhibition). gadgetrivia.com.
Archived from the original (http://www.gadgetrivia.com/8164-best_robot_internatio
nal_robot_exhibition) on 11 May 2012.
03. Robots Today and Tomorrow: IFR Presents the 2007 World Robotics Statistics
Survey (http://www.robots.com/blog.php?tag=48) Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20080205041924/http://www.robots.com/blog.php?tag=48) 2008-02-05 at
the Wayback Machine; World Robotics; 2007-10-29. Retrieved 2007-12-14
04. Reporting by Watanabe, Hiroaki; Writing and additional reporting by Negishi,
Mayumi; Editing by Norton, Jerry; Japan's robots slug it out to be world champ (http
s://www.reuters.com/article/technologyNews/idUST32811820071202) Archived (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20071213142513/http://www.reuters.com/article/technol
ogyNews/idUST32811820071202) 2007-12-13 at the Wayback Machine; Reuters;
2007-12-02. Retrieved 2007-01-01
05. Ho, C. C.; MacDorman, K. F.; Pramono, Z. A. D. (2008). "Human emotion and the
uncanny valley: A GLM, MDS, and ISOMAP analysis of robot video ratings" (http://w
ww.macdorman.com/kfm/writings/pubs/Ho2007EmotionUncanny.pdf) (PDF). 2008
3rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI). Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20080911135038/http://www.macdorman.com/kfm/w
ritings/pubs/Ho2007EmotionUncanny.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 2008-09-11.
Retrieved 2008-09-24.
06. AAAI webpage of materials on robot ethics (https://web.archive.org/web/20110805
002115/http://www.aaai.org/AITopics/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/AITopics/Ethics)
(Archived).
07. AAAI compilation of articles on robot rights (https://web.archive.org/web/20120406
094358/http://www.aaai.org/AITopics/newstopics/ethics5.html) (Archived), sources
compiled up to 2006.

08. Scientists Predict Artiﬁcial Brain in 10 Years (https://web.archive.org/web/20091129
103022/http://www.familyhealthguide.co.uk/scientists-predict-artiﬁcial-brain-in-10years.html) (Archived), by Kristie McNealy M.D. July 29, 2009.
09. Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind (https://books.google.com/books?id=fd
uW6KHhWtQC&dq=robot&printsec=frontcover&source=bl&ots=SuquyjYb4n&sig=
5S3L8pqiLqZ_yjJgh97tPE6F7gQ&hl=en&ei=R1-MSubxLs_dlAfJm_26CA&sa=X&oi=b
ook_result&ct=result&resnum=6#v=onepage&q=&f=false) Archived (https://web.
archive.org/web/20161205073358/https://books.google.com/books?id=fduW6KHh
WtQC&dq=robot&printsec=frontcover&source=bl&ots=SuquyjYb4n&sig=5S3L8pqi
LqZ_yjJgh97tPE6F7gQ&hl=en&ei=R1-MSubxLs_dlAfJm_26CA&sa=X&oi=book_result
&ct=result&resnum=6#v=onepage&q=&f=false) 2016-12-05 at the Wayback
Machine By Hans Moravec, Google Books.
10. Robots Almost Conquering Walking, Reading, Dancing (http://www.koreaittimes.co
m/story/4668/robots-almost-conquering-walking-reading-dancing) Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20110721092117/http://www.koreaittimes.com/story/466
8/robots-almost-conquering-walking-reading-dancing) 2011-07-21 at the Wayback
Machine, by Matthew Weigand, Korea Itimes, Monday, August 17, 2009.
11. Plug & Pray (http://www.plugandpray-ﬁlm.de/en/content.html) Archived (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20160212040134/http://www.plugandpray-ﬁlm.de/en/content.ht
ml) 2016-02-12 at the Wayback Machine, documentary ﬁlm by Jens Schanze about
the possibilities of AI and robotics.
12. Scientists Worry Machines May Outsmart Man (https://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/2
6/science/26robot.html?_r=1&ref=todayspaper) Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20170701084625/http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/26/science/26robot.html?_
r=1&ref=todayspaper) 2017-07-01 at the Wayback Machine By John Markoﬀ, The
New York Times, July 26, 2009.
13. The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era (htt
p://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/vinge/misc/singularity.html) Archived (https://web.
archive.org/web/20070101133646/http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/vinge/misc/si
ngularity.html) 2007-01-01 at the Wayback Machine, by Vernor Vinge, Department
of Mathematical Sciences, San Diego State University, (c) 1993 by Vernor Vinge.
14. Gaming the Robot Revolution: A military technology expert weighs in on
Terminator: Salvation (http://www.slate.com/id/2218834/) Archived (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20100127191004/http://www.slate.com/id/2218834/) 2010-01-27 at
the Wayback Machine., By P. W. Singer, slate.com Thursday, May 21, 2009.
15. Robot takeover (https://web.archive.org/web/20120419163135/http://www.gyre.or
g/news/explore/robot-takeover) (Archived), gyre.org.
16. robot page (https://www.engadget.com/tag/robotapocalypse) Archived (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20180504222624/https://www.engadget.com/tag/robotapocalyp
se/) 2018-05-04 at the Wayback Machine, Engadget.
17. "Cute robot politely shows self-awareness" (https://www.cnet.com/au/news/cute-ro
bot-politely-shows-self-awareness/). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201508
22211403/http://www.cnet.com/au/news/cute-robot-politely-shows-self-awareness/)
from the original on 2015-08-22. Retrieved 2015-08-19.
18. Call for debate on killer robots (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/8182003.st
m) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090807005005/http://news.bbc.co.uk/
2/hi/technology/8182003.stm) 2009-08-07 at the Wayback Machine, Jason Palmer.
BBC News, August 3, 2009.
19. Robot three-way portends autonomous future (https://www.wired.com/dangerroom/
2009/08/robot-three-way-portends-autonomous-future/) Archived (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20121107102140/http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2009/08/robot-thr
ee-way-portends-autonomous-future/) 2012-11-07 at the Wayback Machine, By
David Axe wired.com, August 13, 2009.

20. New Navy-funded Report Warns of War Robots Going "Terminator" (http://www.daily
tech.com/New%20Navyfunded%20Report%20Warns%20of%20War%20Robots%20
Going%20Terminator/article14298.htm) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/200
90728101106/http://www.dailytech.com/New%20Navyfunded%20Report%20Warn
s%20of%20War%20Robots%20Going%20Terminator/article14298.htm) 2009-07-28
at the Wayback Machine, by Jason Mick (Blog), dailytech.com, February 17, 2009.
21. Navy report warns of robot uprising, suggests a strong moral compass (https://ww
w.engadget.com/2009/02/18/navy-report-warns-of-robot-uprising-suggests-a-strong
-moral-com/) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110604145633/http://www.e
ngadget.com/2009/02/18/navy-report-warns-of-robot-uprising-suggests-a-strong-m
oral-com/) 2011-06-04 at the Wayback Machine, by Joseph L. Flatley
engadget.com, February 18, 2009.
22. New role for robot warriors (http://www.csmonitor.com/Technology/Tech/2010/0217/
New-role-for-robot-warriors) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2015092412094
6/http://www.csmonitor.com/Technology/Tech/2010/0217/New-role-for-robot-warrior
s) 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine Drones are just part of a bid to automate
combat. Can virtual ethics make machines decisionmakers?, by Gregory M. Lamb,
The Christian Science Monitor, February 17, 2010.
23. "Biomass-Eating Military Robot Is a Vegetarian, Company Says" (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20090803135855/http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,533382,00.htm
l). Fox News Channel. 2009-07-16. Archived from the original (http://www.foxnews.
com/story/0,2933,533382,00.html) on 2009-08-03. Retrieved 2009-07-31.
24. Shachtman, Noah (2009-07-17). "Danger Room What's Next in National Security
Company Denies its Robots Feed on the Dead" (https://www.wired.com/dangerroo
m/2009/07/company-denies-its-robots-feed-on-the-dead/). Wired. Archived (https://
web.archive.org/web/20090729095144/http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2009/0
7/company-denies-its-robots-feed-on-the-dead) from the original on 2009-07-29.
Retrieved 2009-07-31.
25. Press release, RTI Inc. (2009 July 16). Cyclone Power Technologies Responds to
Rumors about “Flesh Eating” Military Robot (http://www.robotictechnologyinc.com/i
mages/upload/ﬁle/Cyclone%20Power%20Press%20Release%20EATR%20Rumors%2
0Final%2016%20July%2009.pdf) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/200908231
33634/http://www.robotictechnologyinc.com/images/upload/ﬁle/Cyclone%20Powe
r%20Press%20Release%20EATR%20Rumors%20Final%2016%20July%2009.pdf)
2009-08-23 at the Wayback Machine, pp. 1-2.
26. Press release, RTI Inc. (2009 April 6). "Brief Project Overview" (http://www.roboticte
chnologyinc.com/images/upload/ﬁle/Presentation%20EATR%20Brief%20Overview%
206%20April%2009.pdf) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090823133720/h
ttp://www.robotictechnologyinc.com/images/upload/ﬁle/Presentation%20EATR%20B
rief%20Overview%206%20April%2009.pdf) 2009-08-23 at the Wayback Machine,
EATR: Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot, pp. 22.
27. Manuel de Landa, War in the Age of Intelligent Machines, New York: Zone Books,
1991, 280 pages, Hardcover, ISBN 0-942299-76-0; Paperback, ISBN 0-942299-75-2.

28. E McGaughey, 'Will Robots Automate Your Job Away? Full Employment, Basic
Income, and Economic Democracy' (2018) SSRN, part 3 (https://papers.ssrn.com/s
ol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3044448) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2018
0524201340/https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3044448) 201805-24 at the Wayback Machine. Porter, Eduardo; Manjoo, Farhad (9 March 2016).
"A Future Without Jobs? Two Views of the Changing Work Force" (https://www.nytim
es.com/2016/03/09/business/economy/a-future-without-jobs-two-views-of-the-chan
ging-work-force.html). The New York Times. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
20170215151324/https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/09/business/economy/a-futur
e-without-jobs-two-views-of-the-changing-work-force.html) from the original on 15
February 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2017.. Thompson, Derek (July–August 2015).
"A World Without Work" (https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/07/w
orld-without-work/395294/). The Atlantic. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20
170227122425/https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/07/world-with
out-work/395294/) from the original on 2017-02-27. Retrieved 2017-03-11.
29. Yan (30 July 2011). "Foxconn to replace workers with 1 million robots in 3 years" (ht
tp://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-07/30/c_131018764.htm).
Xinhua News Agency. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20111008201637/htt
p://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-07/30/c_131018764.htm) from
the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 4 August 2011.
30. "Judgment day – employment law and robots in the workplace" (https://futureofwor
khub.squarespace.com/allcontent/2014/11/20/judgment-day-employment-law-androbots-in-the-workplace). futureofworkhub. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0150403233901/https://futureofworkhub.squarespace.com/allcontent/2014/11/20/j
udgment-day-employment-law-and-robots-in-the-workplace) from the original on
2015-04-03. Retrieved 2015-01-07.
31. Delaney, Kevin. "The robot that takes your job should pay taxes, says Bill Gates" (h
ttps://qz.com/911968/bill-gates-the-robot-that-takes-your-job-should-pay-taxes/).
QUARTZ. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170305042737/https://qz.com/9
11968/bill-gates-the-robot-that-takes-your-job-should-pay-taxes/) from the original
on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017.
32. "The Changing Nature of Work"
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2019). Archived (https://web.archive.
org/web/20180930193143/http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2019) from
the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018.
33. "Contact Systems Pick and Place robots" (https://web.archive.org/web/2008091405
0602/http://www.contactsystems.com/c5_series.html). Contact Systems. Archived
from the original (http://www.contactsystems.com/c5_series.html) on 2008-09-14.
Retrieved 2008-09-21.
34. "SMT pick-and-place equipment" (https://web.archive.org/web/20080803173021/ht
tp://www.assembleon.com/surface-mount-assembly/pick-and-place-equipment/a-se
ries/). Assembleon. Archived from the original (http://www.assembleon.com/surface
-mount-assembly/pick-and-place-equipment/a-series/) on 2008-08-03. Retrieved
2008-09-21.
35. "The Basics of Automated Guided Vehicles" (https://web.archive.org/web/20071008
135856/http://www.agvsystems.com/basics/vehicle.htm). Savant Automation, AGV
Systems. Archived from the original (http://www.agvsystems.com/basics/vehicle.ht
m) on 2007-10-08. Retrieved 2007-09-13.
36. "Jervis B. Webb" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130523015511/http://www.jervisb
webb.com/Products/automatic_trailer_loading.aspx?pid=190&qs=1_3_). Webb
SmartLoader. Archived from the original (http://www.jervisbwebb.com/Products/aut
omatic_trailer_loading.aspx?pid=190&qs=1_3_) on 23 May 2013. Retrieved
2 September 2011.

37. "SpeciMinder" (http://www.ccsrobotics.com/products/speciminder.html). CSS
Robotics. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090701131848/http://www.ccsro
botics.com/products/speciminder.html) from the original on 2009-07-01. Retrieved
2008-09-25.
38. "ADAM robot" (https://web.archive.org/web/20060517153330/http://rmtrobotics.co
m/tire_agv.html). RMT Robotics. Archived from the original (http://www.rmtrobotics.
com/tire_agv.html) on 2006-05-17. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
39. "Can Do" (https://web.archive.org/web/20080803173353/http://www.aethon.com/c
an_do_tug.html). Aethon. Archived from the original (http://www.aethon.com/can_d
o_tug.html) on 2008-08-03. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
40. "Eskorta robot" (https://web.archive.org/web/20111206082746/http://www.fennecf
oxtech.com/). Fennec Fox Technologies. Archived from the original (http://www.fenn
ecfoxtech.com) on 2011-12-06. Retrieved 2011-11-25.
41. "Delivery Robots & AGVs" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100226202710/http://ww
w.mobilerobots.com/AGV.html). Mobile Robots. Archived from the original (http://w
ww.mobilerobots.com/AGV.html) on 26 February 2010. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
42. "Dante II, list of published papers" (https://web.archive.org/web/20080515015703/
http://www.ri.cmu.edu/projects/project_163.html). The Robotics Institute of
Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original (http://www.ri.cmu.edu/proje
cts/project_163.html) on 15 May 2008. Retrieved 2007-09-16.
43. "Mars Pathﬁnder Mission: Rover Sojourner" (https://web.archive.org/web/20170201
165939/http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/MPF/rover/sojourner.html). NASA. 1997-07-08.
Archived from the original (http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/MPF/rover/sojourner.html) on
2017-02-01. Retrieved 2007-09-19.
44. "Robot assisted surgery: da Vinci Surgical System" (https://web.archive.org/web/20
070916084349/http://biomed.brown.edu/Courses/BI108/BI108_2005_Groups/04/da
vinci.html). Brown University Division of Biology and Medicine. Archived from the
original (http://biomed.brown.edu/Courses/BI108/BI108_2005_Groups/04/davinci.ht
ml) on 2007-09-16. Retrieved 2007-09-19.
45. The Utilization of Robotic Space Probes in Deep Space Missions:Case Study of AI
Protocols and Nuclear Power Requirements (https://upes.academia.edu/SeeteshPA
NDE/Papers/1717325/The_Utilization_of_Robotic_Space_Probes_in_Deep_Space_Mis
sions_Case_Study_of_AI_Protocols_and_Nuclear_Power_Requirements), Proceedings
of 2011 International Conference on Mechanical Engineering, Robotics and
Aerospace, October 2011.
46. Review: Space Probes (http://www.thespacereview.com/article/2004/1) Archived (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20120831183945/http://www.thespacereview.com/articl
e/2004/1) 2012-08-31 at the Wayback Machine, by Jeﬀ Foust, Monday, January 16,
2012. Review of Space Probes: 50 Years of Exploration from Luna 1 to New
Horizons, by Philippe Séguéla Fireﬂy, 2011.
47. "Celebrities set to reach for Atwood's LongPen" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090
522221123/http://www.cbc.ca/arts/books/story/2007/08/15/longpen-trial.html).
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 2007-08-15. Archived from the original (http://
www.cbc.ca/arts/books/story/2007/08/15/longpen-trial.html) on 22 May 2009.
Retrieved 2008-09-21.
48. Graham, Stephen (2006-06-12). "America's robot army" (https://web.archive.org/w
eb/20120217174704/http://www.newstatesman.com/200606120018). New
Statesman. Archived from the original (http://www.newstatesman.com/200606120
018) on 17 February 2012. Retrieved 2007-09-24.

49. "Battleﬁeld Robots: to Iraq, and Beyond" (http://www.defenseindustrydaily.com/batt
leﬁeld-robots-to-iraq-and-beyond-0727). Defense Industry Daily. 2005-06-20.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20070826201610/http://www.defenseindustr
ydaily.com/battleﬁeld-robots-to-iraq-and-beyond-0727/) from the original on 200708-26. Retrieved 2007-09-24.
50. Shachtman, Noah (November 2005). "The Baghdad Bomb Squad" (https://www.wir
ed.com/wired/archive/13.11/bomb.html?pg=3&topic=bomb). Wired. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20080422132525/http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/13.
11/bomb.html?pg=3&topic=bomb) from the original on 2008-04-22. Retrieved
2007-09-14.
51. Shachtman, Noah (2013-03-28). "WIRED: First Armed Robots on Patrol in Iraq" (htt
p://blog.wired.com/defense/2007/08/httpwwwnational.html). Blog.wired.com.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090403093830/http://blog.wired.com/defe
nse/2007/08/httpwwwnational.html) from the original on 2009-04-03. Retrieved
2014-02-08.
52. Shachtman, Noah (2013-03-28). "WIRED: Armed Robots Pushed To Police" (http://bl
og.wired.com/defense/2007/08/armed-robots-so.html). Blog.wired.com. Archived (h
ttps://web.archive.org/web/20090412043558/http://blog.wired.com/defense/2007/0
8/armed-robots-so.html) from the original on 2009-04-12. Retrieved 2014-02-08.
53. "America's Robot Army" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100205083139/http://ww
w.popularmechanics.com/technology/military_law/4252643.html?page=2).
Popularmechanics.com. 2009-12-18. Archived from the original (http://www.popular
mechanics.com/technology/military_law/4252643.html?page=2) on 2010-02-05.
Retrieved 2014-02-08.
54. The Present and Future of Unmanned Drone Aircraft: An Illustrated Field Guide (htt
p://www.popsci.com/technology/article/2010-02/ﬁeld-guide-ﬂying-robots); Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20100226101134/http://www.popsci.com/technology/
article/2010-02/ﬁeld-guide-ﬂying-robots) 2010-02-26 at the Wayback Machine
Inside the wild kingdom of the world's newest and most spectacular species of
unmanned aircraft, from swarming insect ’bots that can storm a burning building to
a seven-ton weaponized spyplane invisible to radar. By Eric Hagerman, Popular
Science, 23 February 2010.
55. "Taranis: The m Fighter Jet Of The Future" (https://web.archive.org/web/201007150
51514/http://news.sky.com/skynews/Home/UK-News/Taranis-MoD-And-BAE-Systems
-Unveil-Futuristic-Unmanned-Fighter-Jet/Article/201007215663917?lpos=UK_News_
Second_Home_Page_Article_Teaser_Region_0&lid=ARTICLE_15663917_Taranis%3A_
MoD_And_BAE_Systems_Unveil_Futuristic_Unmanned_Fighter_Jet). Ministry of
Defence. 2010-07-12. Archived from the original (http://news.sky.com/skynews/Ho
me/UK-News/Taranis-MoD-And-BAE-Systems-Unveil-Futuristic-Unmanned-Fighter-Je
t/Article/201007215663917?lpos=UK_News_Second_Home_Page_Article_Teaser_Re
gion_0&lid=ARTICLE_15663917_Taranis:_MoD_And_BAE_Systems_Unveil_Futuristic_
Unmanned_Fighter_Jet) on 2010-07-15. Retrieved 2010-07-13.
56. Emery, Daniel (2010-07-12). "MoD lifts lid on unmanned combat plane prototype"
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/10602105.stm). BBC News. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20100712191703/http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/1
0602105.stm) from the original on 2010-07-12. Retrieved 2010-07-12.
57. AAAI Presidential Panel on Long-Term AI Futures 2008–2009 Study (http://research.
microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/horvitz/AAAI_Presidential_Panel_2008-2009.htm)
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090828214741/http://research.microsoft.c
om/en-us/um/people/horvitz/AAAI_Presidential_Panel_2008-2009.htm) 2009-08-28
at the Wayback Machine, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Retrieved July 26, 2009.

58. Why We Need Friendly AI (https://web.archive.org/web/20120524150856/http://ww
w.asimovlaws.com/articles/archives/2004/07/why_we_need_fri_1.html),
Asimovlaws.com, July 2004. Retrieved July 27, 2009.
59. Robotic age poses ethical dilemma (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/642592
7.stm) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20090215145547/http://news.bbc.co.
uk/1/hi/technology/6425927.stm) 2009-02-15 at the Wayback Machine; BBC News;
2007-03-07. Retrieved 2007-01-02;
60. Asimov's First Law: Japan Sets Rules for Robots (http://www.livescience.com/techno
logy/060526_robot_rules.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2008101302
5115/http://www.livescience.com/technology/060526_robot_rules.html) 2008-10-13
at the Wayback Machine, By Bill Christensen, livescience.com, May 26, 2006.
61. Japan drafts rules for advanced robots (http://www.physorg.com/news95078958.ht
ml) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20081011103322/http://www.physorg.co
m/news95078958.html) 2008-10-11 at the Wayback Machine, UPI via physorg.com,
April 6, 2007.
62. Report compiled by the Japanese government's Robot Industry Policy Committee Building a Safe and Secure Social System Incorporating the Coexistence of Humans
and Robots (http://www.meti.go.jp/english/press/data/20090325_01.html) Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20110927070744/http://www.meti.go.jp/english/pres
s/data/20090325_01.html) 2011-09-27 at the Wayback Machine, Oﬃcial Japan
government press release, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, March 2009.
63. Toward the human-Robot Coexistence Society: on Safety intelligence for next
Generation Robots (http://works.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&co
ntext=weng_yueh_hsuan) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2009092618141
9/http://works.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1000&context=weng_yueh
_hsuan) 2009-09-26 at the Wayback Machine, report by Yueh-Hsuan Weng, China
Ministry of the Interior, International Journal of Social Robotics (https://www.springe
r.com/engineering/robotics/journal/12369) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0170429183338/http://www.springer.com/engineering/robotics/journal/12369)
2017-04-29 at the Wayback Machine, April 7, 2009.
64. Evolving Robots Learn To Lie To Each Other (http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,
540721,00.html) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130518220343/http://w
ww.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,540721,00.html) 2013-05-18 at the Wayback
Machine, Popular Science, August 19, 2009.
65. "Rio Tinto Media Center – Rio Tinto boosts driverless truck ﬂeet to 150 under Mine
of the Future™ programme" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130424100842/https://
www.riotinto.com/media/5157_21165.asp). Riotinto.com. Archived from the original
(http://www.riotinto.com/media/5157_21165.asp) on 2013-04-24. Retrieved
2014-02-08.
66. "BHP Billiton hits go on autonomous drills" (http://www.itnews.com.au/news/bhp-bil
liton-hits-go-on-autonomous-drills-421008). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/
20160822040424/http://www.itnews.com.au/news/bhp-billiton-hits-go-on-autonom
ous-drills-421008) from the original on 2016-08-22. Retrieved 2016-07-27.
67. Adrian (2011-09-06). "AIMEX blog – Autonomous mining equipment" (http://adrianb
oeing.blogspot.com/2011/06/aimex.html). Adrianboeing.blogspot.com. Archived (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20131218162920/http://adrianboeing.blogspot.com/201
1/06/aimex.html) from the original on 2013-12-18. Retrieved 2014-02-08.
68. "Atlas Copco – RCS" (https://web.archive.org/web/20140207175830/http://www.atla
scopco.com/rcs/). Atlascopco.com. Archived from the original (http://www.atlascopc
o.com/rcs/) on 2014-02-07. Retrieved 2014-02-08.
69. "Transmin – Rocklogic" (http://rocklogic.com.au/). Rocklogic.com.au. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20140125105842/http://rocklogic.com.au/) from the
original on 2014-01-25. Retrieved 2014-02-08.

70. Topping, Mike; Smith, Jane (1999). "An Overview Of Handy 1, A Rehabilitation Robot
For The Severely Disabled" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090805111627/https://
www.csun.edu/cod/conf/1999/proceedings/session0059.htm). CSUN Center on
Disabilities Conference Proceedings. 1999. Proceedings: Session 59. Archived from
the original (http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf/1999/proceedings/session0059.htm) on
5 August 2009. Retrieved 14 August 2010. "The early version of the Handy 1
system consisted of a Cyber 310 robotic arm with ﬁve degrees of freedom plus a
gripper."
71. Jeavans, Christine (2004-11-29). "Welcome to the ageing future" (http://news.bbc.c
o.uk/1/hi/uk/4012797.stm). BBC News. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2007
1016123948/http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4012797.stm) from the original on
2007-10-16. Retrieved 2007-09-26.
72. "Statistical Handbook of Japan: Chapter 2 Population" (https://web.archive.org/web/
20130906015841/http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/handbook/c02cont.htm).
Statistics Bureau & Statistical Research and Training Institute. Archived from the
original (http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/handbook/c02cont.htm) on 2013-09-06.
Retrieved 2007-09-26.
73. "Robotic future of patient care" (https://web.archive.org/web/20071121041811/htt
p://www.e-health-insider.com/comment_and_analysis/250/robotic_future_of_patient
_care). E-Health Insider. 2007-08-16. Archived from the original (http://www.e-healt
h-insider.com/comment_and_analysis/250/robotic_future_of_patient_care) on 21
November 2007. Retrieved 2007-09-26.
74. Gebhart, Fred (2019-07-04). "The Future of Pharmacy Automation" (https://www.dr
ugtopics.com/article/future-pharmacy-automation). Drug Topics. Retrieved
2019-11-20.
75. Dolan, Kerry A. "R2D2 Has Your Pills" (https://www.forbes.com/2009/10/08/robots-m
ckesson-business-healthcare-medical-tech-09-mckesson.html). Forbes. Retrieved
2019-11-20.
76. "Nanobots Play Football" (https://web.archive.org/web/20130403180057/https://ww
w.techbirbal.com/viewtopic.php?p=3687&sid=7faaeeb64eaf84880b23755fea7fa7c
d). Techbirbal. Archived from the original (http://www.techbirbal.com/viewtopic.ph
p?p=3687&sid=7faaeeb64eaf84880b23755fea7fa7cd) on 2013-04-03. Retrieved
2014-02-08.
77. "KurzweilAI.net" (https://web.archive.org/web/20100621142011/http://www.kurzwei
lai.net/meme/frame.html?main=%2Farticles%2Fart0220.html). 21 June 2010.
Archived from the original (http://www.kurzweilai.net/meme/frame.html?main=/arti
cles/art0220.html) on 21 June 2010. Retrieved 5 July 2016.
78. "(Eric Drexler 1986) Engines of Creation, The Coming Era of Nanotechnology" (htt
p://www.e-drexler.com/d/06/00/EOC/EOC_Chapter_11.html). E-drexler.com.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20140906190853/http://e-drexler.com/d/06/
00/EOC/EOC_Chapter_11.html) from the original on 2014-09-06. Retrieved
2014-02-08.
79. Chris Phoenix (December 2003). "Of Chemistry, Nanobots, and Policy" (http://www.
crnano.org/Debate.htm). Center for Responsible Nanotechnology. Archived (https://
web.archive.org/web/20071011132926/http://crnano.org/Debate.htm) from the
original on 2007-10-11. Retrieved 2007-10-28.
80. "Nanotechnology pioneer slays 'grey goo' myths" (http://www.iop.org/EJ/news/-topi
c=763/journal/0957-4484). Institute of Physics Electronics Journals. 2004-06-07.
Retrieved 2007-10-28.
81. (1996) LEGO(TM)s to the Stars: Active MesoStructures, Kinetic Cellular Automata,
and Parallel Nanomachines for Space Applications (http://www.islandone.org/MMS
G/9609lego.htm) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20070927215619/http://w
ww.islandone.org/MMSG/9609lego.htm) 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine

82. (Robert Fitch, Zack Butler and Daniela Rus) Reconﬁguration Planning for
Heterogeneous Self-Reconﬁguring Robots (http://groups.csail.mit.edu/drl/publicatio
ns/papers/MeltSortGrow.pdf) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/200706192123
52/http://groups.csail.mit.edu/drl/publications/papers/MeltSortGrow.pdf) 2007-0619 at the Wayback Machine
83. John Schwartz (2007-03-27). "In the Lab: Robots That Slink and Squirm" (https://ww
w.nytimes.com/2007/03/27/science/27robo.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&ei=5070&e
n=91395fe7439a5b72&ex=1177128000). The New York Times. Archived (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20150403233312/http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/27/science/
27robo.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1&ei=5070&en=91395fe7439a5b72&ex=117712
8000) from the original on 2015-04-03. Retrieved 2008-09-22.
84. Kat Eschner (25 March 2019). "Squishy robots now have squishy computers to
control them" (https://www.popsci.com/soft-robot-computer). Popular Science.
85. "The softer side of robotics" (https://store.hp.com/us/en/cv/taw-article?ai=199&ap
=46&au=The_softer_side_of_robotics&am=May&ay=2019#false). May 2019.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20190517175356/https://store.hp.com/us/e
n/cv/taw-article?ai=199&ap=46&au=The_softer_side_of_robotics&am=May&ay=2
019#false) from the original on 2019-05-17. Retrieved 2019-05-17.
86. "SRI/MobileRobots" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090212091659/https://www.act
ivrobots.com/RESEARCH/wheelchair.html). activrobots.com. Archived from the
original (http://www.activrobots.com/RESEARCH/wheelchair.html) on 2009-02-12.
87. "Open-source micro-robotic project" (http://www.swarmrobot.org). Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20071111025135/http://www.swarmrobot.org/) from the
original on 2007-11-11. Retrieved 2007-10-28.
88. "Swarm" (https://web.archive.org/web/20070927191006/https://www.irobot.com/s
p.cfm?pageid=149). iRobot Corporation. Archived from the original (http://www.iro
bot.com/sp.cfm?pageid=149) on 2007-09-27. Retrieved 2007-10-28.
89. Knapp, Louise (2000-12-21). "Look, Up in the Sky: Roboﬂy" (https://www.wired.com/
science/discoveries/news/2000/12/40750). Wired. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20120626210619/http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2000/12/
40750) from the original on 2012-06-26. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
90. "The Cutting Edge of Haptics" (http://www.technologyreview.com/read_article.asp
x?id=17363&ch=biotech&sc=&pg=1). MIT Technology review. Retrieved
2008-09-25.
91. "Artists & Robots Exposition au Grand Palais du 5 avril au 9 juillet 2018" (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20190814133056/https://www.grandpalais.fr/en/event/artists-ro
bots). 2019-08-14. Archived from the original (https://www.grandpalais.fr/en/event/
artists-robots) on 2019-08-14. Retrieved 2020-02-03.
92. "Comic Potential : Q&A with Director Stephen Cole" (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0090103103732/http://www.arts.cornell.edu/theatrearts/CTA/Program%20Notes/co
mic%20potential.asp). Cornell University. Archived from the original (http://www.art
s.cornell.edu/theatrearts/CTA/Program%20Notes/comic%20potential.asp) on 3
January 2009. Retrieved 2007-11-21.
93. Freedman, ed. by Carl (2005). Conversations with Isaac Asimov (https://archive.or
g/details/isbn_9781578067381) (1. ed.). Jackson: Univ. Press of Mississippi. p. vii.
ISBN 978-1-57806-738-1. Retrieved 4 August 2011. "... quite possibly the most
proliﬁc"
94. Oakes, Elizabeth H. (2004). American writers (https://archive.org/details/americanw
riters0000oake). New York: Facts on File. p. 24 (https://archive.org/details/american
writers0000oake/page/24). ISBN 978-0-8160-5158-8. Retrieved 4 August 2011.
"most proliﬁc authors asimov."

95. He wrote "over 460 books as well as thousands of articles and reviews", and was
the "third most proliﬁc writer of all time [and] one of the founding fathers of
modern science ﬁction". White, Michael (2005). Isaac Asimov: a life of the grand
master of science ﬁction (https://books.google.com/books?id=EWbMiyS9v98C).
Carroll & Graf. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-7867-1518-3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20161205023302/https://books.google.com/books?id=EWbMiyS9v98C) from
the original on 2016-12-05. Retrieved 2016-09-25.
96. R. Clarke. "Asimov's Laws of Robotics – Implications for Information Technology" (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20080722022618/https://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.
Clarke/SOS/Asimov.html). Australian National University/IEEE. Archived from the
original (http://www.anu.edu.au/people/Roger.Clarke/SOS/Asimov.html) on 2008-0722. Retrieved 2008-09-25.
97. Seiler, Edward; Jenkins, John H. (2008-06-27). "Isaac Asimov FAQ" (http://www.asim
ovonline.com/asimov_FAQ.html). Isaac Asimov Home Page. Archived (https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20120716233605/http://www.asimovonline.com/asimov_FAQ.html)
from the original on 2012-07-16. Retrieved 2008-09-24.
98. White, Michael (2005). Isaac Asimov: A Life of the Grand Master of Science Fiction.
Carroll & Graf. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-7867-1518-3.
99. "Campaign launched against 'harmful' sex robots" (https://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/
15/sex-robots-campaign.html). CNBC. 2015-09-15. Archived (https://web.archive.or
g/web/20170913212328/https://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/15/sex-robots-campaign.h
tml) from the original on 2017-09-13. Retrieved 2017-09-10.
00. "Intelligent machines: Call for a ban on robots designed as sex toys" (https://www.b
bc.com/news/technology-34118482). BBC News. 2015-09-15. Archived (https://we
b.archive.org/web/20180630212424/https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-34118
482) from the original on 2018-06-30. Retrieved 2018-06-21.
01. "Campaign calls for ban on sex robots" (https://www.wired.co.uk/article/campaign-a
gainst-sex-robots). Wired UK. 2005-09-15. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0170914215759/https://www.wired.co.uk/article/campaign-against-sex-robots)
from the original on 2017-09-14. Retrieved 2017-09-10.
02. Justin Wm. Moyer (15 September 2015). "Having sex with robots is really, really
bad, Campaign Against Sex Robots says" (https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/
morning-mix/wp/2015/09/15/having-sex-with-robots-is-really-really-bad-campaign-a
gainst-sex-robots-says/). Washington Post. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0160908172134/https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/09/
15/having-sex-with-robots-is-really-really-bad-campaign-against-sex-robots-says/)
from the original on 8 September 2016. Retrieved 10 September 2017.

Further reading
See this humanoid robot artist sketch drawings from sight (CNN, Video, 2019) (http
s://www.cnn.com/videos/business/2019/06/06/uk-oxford-university-ai-da-humanoidrobot-artist-ge-lon-orig.cnn-business/video/playlists/business-robots/)
Čapek, Karel (1920). R.U.R. (https://web.archive.org/web/20160825193650/https://
ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/c/capek/karel/rur/), Aventinum, Prague.
Margolius, Ivan. 'The Robot of Prague', Newsletter, The Friends of Czech Heritage
no. 17, Autumn 2017, pp. 3 – 6.
https://czechfriends.net/images/RobotsMargoliusJul2017.pdf
Glaser, Horst Albert and Rossbach, Sabine: The Artiﬁcial Human, Frankfurt/M.,
Bern, New York 2011 "A Tragical History" (https://www.amazon.com/Artiﬁcial-Huma
n-Tragical-History/dp/3631578083)

TechCast Article Series, Jason Rupinski and Richard Mix, "Public Attitudes to
Androids: Robot Gender, Tasks, & Pricing" (https://web.archive.org/web/200905130
32434/http://www.techcast.org/Upload/PDFs/050804104155TC.androids2.pdf)
Cheney, Margaret [1989:123] (1981). Tesla, Man Out of Time. Dorset Press. New
York. ISBN 0-88029-419-1
Craig, J.J. (2005). Introduction to Robotics, Pearson Prentice Hall. Upper Saddle
River, NJ.
Gutkind, L. (2006). Almost Human: Making Robots Think. New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, Inc.
Needham, Joseph (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 2. Taipei: Caves
Books Ltd.
Sotheby's New York. The Tin Toy Robot Collection of Matt Wyse (1996)
Tsai, L. W. (1999). Robot Analysis. Wiley. New York.
DeLanda, Manuel. War in the Age of Intelligent Machines. 1991. Swerve. New York.
Journal of Field Robotics (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1002/(ISSN)15564967)

External links
Robot (https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/505818) at the Encyclopædia
Britannica
Robotics (https://curlie.org/Computers/Robotics) at Curlie
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robot&oldid=961539530"

This page was last edited on 9 June 2020, at 02:18 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may
apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-proﬁt organization.

