Earth
Our Home Planet

Our home planet is the third planet from the Sun, and the only
place we know of so far that’s inhabited by living things.

The Latest

While Earth is only the fifth largest planet in the solar

VERITAS: Exploring the
Deep Truths of Venus

system, it is the only world in our solar system with
liquid water on the surface. Just slightly larger than
nearby Venus, Earth is the biggest of the four
planets closest to the Sun, all of which are made of rock and
metal.
The name Earth is at least 1,000 years old. All of the planets,
except for Earth, were named after Greek and Roman gods and
goddesses. However, the name Earth is a Germanic word, which
simply means “the ground.”
Go Farther. Explore Our Home Planet In Depth ›

10 Need-to-Know Things About Our Home Planet

1

2

3

MEASURING UP

THIRD ROCK

AS THE WORLD TURNS

If the Sun were as tall as a typical

Earth orbits our Sun, a star. Earth is

A day on Earth is 24 hours. Earth

front door, Earth would be the size

the third planet from the Sun at a

makes a complete orbit around the

of a nickel.

distance of about 93 million miles

sun (a year in Earth time) in about

(150 million km).

365 days.

4

5

WE'RE ON IT

BREATHE EASY

Earth is a rocky planet with a solid

Earth's atmosphere is 78 percent

and dynamic surface of mountains,

nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen and 1

canyons, plains and more. Most of

percent other ingredients—the

our planet is covered in water.

perfect balance to breathe and live.

6

7

8

OUR COSMIC COMPANION

RINGLESS

ORBITAL SCIENCE

Earth has one moon.

Earth has no rings.

Many orbiting spacecraft study the
Earth from above as a whole system
—observing the atmosphere, ocean,
glaciers, and the solid earth.

9

10

HOME, SWEET HOME

PROTECTIVE SHIELD
Our atmosphere protects us from

Earth is the perfect place for life as
we know it.

Ou at osp e e p otects us

o

incoming meteoroids, most of which
break up in our atmosphere before
they can strike the surface.

Did You Know?

The first being to travel to outer space was a female part-Samoyed terrier originally named Kudryavka
(Little Curly) but later renamed Laika (Barker). She weighed about 6 kg. Image Credit: National Space
Science Data Center

Laika the dog was the first Earthling to orbit Earth aboard the
Soviet Union's Sputnik 2 in 1957. She did not survive the trip. A
few years later, the next two Soviet space dogs—Belka and

Strelka—became the first living creatures to return from space
alive—paving the way for future human explorers.

Pop Culture
Storytellers explore the nature of our planet and possible
alternate realities in many books, movies and television shows.
The iconic Planet of the Apes film (and many sequels) takes place
in a future in which astronauts "discover" a planet inhabited by
highly intelligent apes and primitive humans, only to realize later,
much to their dismay, that—spoiler alert!—it was Earth all along.
In the long-running and re-booted television series Battlestar

Galactica, tired survivors of a war with highly evolved robots
called cylons are on a quest to find Earth, a long-lost colony.
In other stories, Earth has been abandoned or destroyed, such as
in the Joss Whedon series Firefly or the book and its film
adaptation The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. In the animated
feature Titan A.E., Earth has been destroyed by an alien species,
but a well-placed planet builder recreates it and all the species
that live on it.

Kid-Friendly Earth
Our home planet Earth is a rocky, terrestrial planet. It has
a solid and active surface with mountains, valleys,
canyons, plains and so much more. Earth is special
because it is an ocean planet. Water covers 70 percent
of Earth's surface.
Earth's atmosphere is made mostly of nitrogen and has
plenty of oxygen for us to breathe. The atmosphere also
protects us from incoming meteoroids, most of which
break up before they can hit the surface.
Visit NASA Space Place for more kid-friendly facts.
NASA Space Place: All About Earth ›

Resources
NASA Earth Observatory
NASA’s Climate Portal
NASA Earth Science Division

Page Updated: March 22, 2019

This site is maintained by the Planetary Science Communications team at
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.
Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: Dr. Lori Glaze
NASA Official: Kristen Erickson
Project Lead / Producer: Phillips Davis
Social Media Lead: Bill Dunford

