The smallest planet in our solar system and nearest to the Sun,
Mercury is only slightly larger than Earth's Moon.
From the surface of Mercury, the Sun would appear
more than three times as large as it does when

The Latest

viewed from Earth, and the sunlight would be as

July 2020: The Next Full
Moon is the Buck Moon

much as seven times brighter. Despite its proximity
to the Sun, Mercury is not the hottest planet in our
solar system – that title belongs to nearby Venus,
thanks to its dense atmosphere.
Go farther. Explore Mercury In Depth ›

10 Need-to-Know Things About Mercury

1

2

3

SMALLEST

INSIDER

LONG DAYS, SHORT YEARS

Mercury is the smallest planet in our

It is the closest planet to the Sun at a

One day on Mercury (the time it

solar system—only slightly larger

distance of about 36 million miles (58

takes for Mercury to rotate or spin

than Earth's Moon.

million kilometers) or 0.39 AU.

once with respect to the stars) takes
59 Earth days. One day-night cycle
on Mercury takes 175.97 Earth days.
Mercury makes a complete orbit
around the Sun (a year in Mercury
time) in just 88 Earth days.

4

5

ROUGH SURFACE

CAN'T BREATHE IT

Mercury is a rocky planet, also

Mercury's thin atmosphere, or

known as a terrestrial planet.

exosphere, is composed mostly of

Mercury has a solid, cratered

oxygen (O2), sodium (Na), hydrogen

surface, much like the Earth's moon.

(H2), helium (He), and potassium (K).
Atoms that are blasted off the
surface by the solar wind and
micrometeoroid impacts create
Mercury's exosphere.

MERCURY TRANSIT - NOVEMBER 2006

6

7

8

MOONLESS

RINGLESS

TOUGH PLACE TO LIVE

Mercury has no moons.

There are no rings around Mercury.

No evidence for life has been found
on Mercury. Daytime Temperatures
can reach 430 degrees Celsius (800
degrees Fahrenheit) and drop to
-180 degrees Celsius (-290 degrees
Fahrenheit) at night. It is unlikely life
(as we know it) could survive on this
planet.

9

10

BIG SUN

ROBOTIC VISITORS

Standing on Mercury's surface at its

The two spacecraft of ESA-JAXA's

closest approach to the Sun, our star

BepiColombo are en route to

would appear more than three times

Mercury. NASA's Mariner 10 was the

larger than it does on Earth.

first mission to explore Mercury.
NASA's MESSENGER was the first to
orbit the innermost planet.

Did You Know?

HOLLOWS ON MERCURY

Because of Mercury's elliptical—egg-shaped—orbit and sluggish
rotation, the morning Sun appears to rise briefly, set and rise
again from some parts of the planet's surface. The same thing
happens in reverse at sunset.

Pop Culture
The smallest planet in our solar system has a big presence in our
collective imagination. Scores of science fiction writers have been
inspired by Mercury, including Isaac Asimov, C. S. Lewis, Ray
Bradbury, Arthur C. Clarke and H. P. Lovecraft. Television and film
writers, too, have found the planet an ideal location for
storytelling. In the animated television show Invader Zim, Mercury
is turned into a prototype giant spaceship by the extinct Martians.
And in the 2007 film Sunshine, the Icarus II spacecraft goes into
orbit around Mercury to rendezvous with the Icarus I.
In the comic strip Calvin and Hobbes, Calvin and his classmate
Susie give a presentation about Mercury, in which Calvin's
contribution is full of questionable information: "The planet
Mercury was named after a Roman god with winged feet," says
Calvin. "Mercury was the god of flowers and bouquets, which is
why today he is a registered trademark of FTD florists. Why they
named a planet after this guy, I can't imagine."

Resources
Planetary Photojournal: Mercury
Johns Hopkins University MESSENGER Mission Site

Page Updated: April 10, 2019

This site is maintained by the Planetary Science Communications team at
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.
Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: Dr. Lori Glaze
NASA Official: Kristen Erickson
Project Lead / Producer: Phillips Davis
Social Media Lead: Bill Dunford

