Planetary Features

Interesting Facts About Uranus
Uranus is known as the “sideways planet” because it rotates on
its side.
Uranus was discovered in 1781 by William Herschel.
Uranus was the first planet found using a telescope.
Uranus is an Ice Giant planet and nearly four times larger than
Earth.
Uranus has 27 known moons, most of which are named after
literary characters.
Like Saturn, Jupiter and Neptune, Uranus is a ringed planet.

The first planet found with the aid of a telescope, Uranus was
discovered in 1781 by astronomer William Herschel, although he
originally thought it was either a comet or a star.
It was two years later that the object was universally
accepted as a new planet, in part because of
observations by astronomer Johann Elert Bode.
Herschel tried unsuccessfully to name his discovery

The Latest
NASA Scientist
Simulates Sunsets on
Other Worlds

Georgium Sidus after King George III. Instead the
scientific community accepted Bode's suggestion to name it
Uranus, the Greek god of the sky, as suggested by Bode.
Go Farther. Explore Uranus In Depth ›

10 Need-to-Know Things About Uranus

1

2

3

HUGE

SEVENTH WANDERER

SHORT-ISH DAY, LONGISH YEAR

Uranus is about four times wider

Uranus orbits our Sun, a star, and is

Uranus takes about 17 hours to

than Earth. If Earth were a large

the seventh planet from the Sun at a

rotate once (a Uranian day), and

apple, Uranus would be the size of a

distance of about 1.8 billion miles

about 84 Earth years to complete an

basketball.

(2.9 billion kilometers).

orbit of the Sun (a Uranian year).

4

5

ICE GIANT

GASSY

Uranus is an ice giant. Most of its

Uranus has an atmosphere made

mass is a hot, dense fluid of "icy"

mostly of molecular hydrogen and

materials – water, methane and

atomic helium, with a small amount

ammonia – above a small rocky core.

of methane.

6

7

8

MANY MOONS

THE OTHER RINGED WORLD

A BIT LONELY

Uranus has 27 known moons, and

Uranus has 13 known rings. The inner

Voyager 2 is the only spacecraft to

they are named after characters

rings are narrow and dark and the

fly by Uranus. No spacecraft has

from the works of William

outer rings are brightly colored.

orbited this distant planet to study it

Shakespeare and Alexander Pope.

at length and up close.

9

10

LIFELESS

ONE COOL FACT

Uranus cannot support life as we

Like Venus, Uranus rotates east to

know it.

west. But Uranus is unique in that it
rotates on its side.

Did You Know?
Uranus' unique sideways rotation makes for weird seasons. The
planet's north pole experiences 21 years of nighttime in winter, 21
years of daytime in summer and 42 years of day and night in the
spring and fall.

Pop Culture
Uranus is the "butt" of more than a few jokes and witty (and not
so witty) puns, but it's also a frequent destination in various
fictional stories, such as the video game Mass Effect and TV
shows like Doctor Who. The radioactive element uranium was
named after Uranus when it was discovered in 1789, just eight
years after the planet was discovered.

Kid-Friendly Uranus
Uranus is made of water, methane, and ammonia fluids
above a small rocky center. Its atmosphere is made of
hydrogen and helium like Jupiter and Saturn, but it also
has methane. The methane makes Uranus blue.
Uranus also has faint rings. The inner rings are narrow
and dark. The outer rings are brightly colored and easier
to see.
Like Venus, Uranus rotates in the opposite direction as
most other planets. And unlike any other planet, Uranus
rotates on its side.
Visit NASA Space Place for more kid-friendly facts.
NASA Space Place: All About Uranus ›

Resources
NASA Planetary Photojournal: Uranus
National Space Science Data Center Photo Gallery: Uranus

Page Updated: November 22, 2019

This site is maintained by the Planetary Science Communications team at
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.

Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: Dr. Lori Glaze
NASA Official: Kristen Erickson
Project Lead / Producer: Phillips Davis
Social Media Lead: Bill Dunford

