Typewriter
A typewriter is a mechanical or electromechanical
machine for writing characters similar to those
produced by a printer's movable type. Typically, a
typewriter has an array of keys, and each one causes
a diﬀerent single character to be produced on the
paper, by means of a ribbon with dried ink struck
against the paper by a type element similar to the
sorts used in movable type letterpress printing. On
some typewriters, a separate type element (called a
typebar) corresponds to each key; others use a single
type element (such as a typeball or disc) with a
diﬀerent portion of it used for each character. At the
end of the nineteenth century, the term typewriter
was also applied to a person who used a typing
machine.[1]

Mechanical desktop
typewriters, such as this
Touchmaster Five, were longtime standards of government
agencies, newsrooms, and
oﬃces

The ﬁrst commercial typewriters were introduced in
1874,[2] but did not become common in oﬀices until
after the mid-1880s.[3] The typewriter quickly became
an indispensable tool for practically all writing other
than personal handwritten correspondence. It was
widely used by professional writers, in oﬀices, and for
business correspondence in private homes.
Play media
Typewriters were a standard ﬁxture in most oﬀices up
Video on the history of
to the 1980s. Thereafter, they began to be largely
typewriters and how they
supplanted by computers. Nevertheless, typewriters
operate
remain common in some parts of the world, are
required for a few speciﬁc applications, and are
popular in certain subcultures. In many Indian cities
and towns, typewriters are still used, especially in roadside and legal oﬀices due to a
lack of continuous, reliable electricity.[4] The QWERTY keyboard layout, developed
for typewriters, remains the standard for computer keyboards.[5]

Notable typewriter manufacturers included E.
Remington and Sons, IBM, Godrej,[6] Imperial
Typewriter Company, Oliver Typewriter Company,
Olivetti, Royal Typewriter Company, Smith Corona,
Underwood Typewriter Company, Adler Typewriter
Company and Olympia Werke.[7]

Contents
History
Hansen Writing Ball

Play media
Video showing the operation of
a typewriter

Sholes and Glidden typewriter
Index typewriter
Standardization
Frontstriking
Shift key
Tab key
Dead keys
Character sizes
Color
"Noiseless" designs

Disassembled parts of an Adler
Favorit mechanical typewriter

Electric designs
Early electric models
IBM Selectric
Later electric models
Typewriter/printer hybrids
Electronic typewriters
Decline
Correction technologies
Typewriter erasers
Eraser shield
Erasable bond
Correction ﬂuid
Dry correction
Legacy
Keyboard layouts
QWERTY
Other layouts
Typewriter conventions
Terminology
Social eﬀects
Authors and writers who had notable
relationships with typewriters
Early adopters
Others
Late users
Typewriters in popular culture
In music
Other
Forensic examination
Gallery
See also
References

An Elliott-Fisher book typewriter
on display at the Historic
Archive and Museum of Mining
in Pachuca, Mexico

Patents
Further reading
External links
Revival

History
Although many modern typewriters have one of
several similar designs, their invention was
incremental, developed by numerous inventors
working independently or in competition with each
other over a series of decades. As with the
automobile, telephone, and telegraph, a number of
people contributed insights and inventions that
eventually resulted in ever more commercially
successful instruments. Historians have estimated
that some form of typewriter was invented 52 times
as thinkers tried to come up with a workable
design.[8]

Peter Mitterhofer's typewriter
prototype (1864)

Some early typing instruments include:
In 1575, an Italian printmaker, Francesco Rampazetto, invented the scrittura
tattile, a machine to impress letters in papers.[9]
In 1714, Henry Mill obtained a patent in Britain for a machine that, from the
patent, appears to have been similar to a typewriter. The patent shows that this
machine was actually created: "[he] hath by his great study and paines & expence
invented and brought to perfection an artiﬁcial machine or method for impressing
or transcribing of letters, one after another, as in writing, whereby all writing
whatsoever may be engrossed in paper or parchment so neat and exact as not to
be distinguished from print; that the said machine or method may be of great use
in settlements and public records, the impression being deeper and more lasting
than any other writing, and not to be erased or counterfeited without manifest
discovery."[10]
In 1802, Italian Agostino Fantoni developed a particular typewriter to enable his
blind sister to write.[11]
Between 1801 and 1808, Italian Pellegrino Turri invented a typewriter for his blind
friend Countess Carolina Fantoni da Fivizzano.[12]
In 1823, Italian Pietro Conti da Cilavegna invented a new model of typewriter, the
tachigrafo, also known as tachitipo.[13]
In 1829, American William Austin Burt patented a machine called the
"Typographer" which, in common with many other early machines, is listed as the
"ﬁrst typewriter". The London Science Museum describes it merely as "the ﬁrst
writing mechanism whose invention was documented", but even that claim may be
excessive, since Turri's invention pre-dates it.[14] Even in the hands of its inventor,
this machine was slower than handwriting. Burt and his promoter John D. Sheldon
never found a buyer for the patent, so the invention was never commercially

produced. Because the typographer used a dial, rather than keys, to select each
character, it was called an "index typewriter" rather than a "keyboard typewriter".
Index typewriters of that era resemble the squeeze-style embosser from the 1960s
more than they resemble the modern keyboard typewriter.
Giuseppe Ravizza, a proliﬁc typewriter inventor, born in Italy in 1811 (died 1885),
spent nearly 40 years of his life obsessively grappling with the complexities of
inventing a usable writing machine. He called his invention Cembalo scrivano o
"macchina da scrivere a tasti" because of its piano-type keys and keyboard. The
story of the 16 models he produced between 1847 and the early 1880s is
described in The Writing Machine and illustrated from Ravizza’s 1855 patent, which
bears similarities to the later upstroke design of the Sholes and Glidden typewriter.
By the mid-19th century, the increasing pace of business communication had created
a need for mechanization of the writing process. Stenographers and telegraphers
could take down information at rates up to 130 words per minute, whereas a writer
with a pen was limited to a maximum of 30 words per minute (the 1853 speed
record).[15]
From 1829 - 1870, many printing or typing machines were patented by inventors in
Europe and America, but none went into commercial production.
American Charles Thurber developed multiple patents, of which his ﬁrst in 1843
was developed as an aid to the blind, such as the 1845 Chirographer.[16]
In 1855, the Italian Giuseppe Ravizza created a prototype typewriter called
Cembalo scrivano o macchina da scrivere a tasti ("Scribe harpsichord, or machine
for writing with keys"). It was an advanced machine that let the user see the
writing as it was typed.
In 1861, Father Francisco João de Azevedo, a Brazilian priest, made his own
typewriter with basic materials and tools, such as wood and knives. In that same
year the Brazilian emperor D. Pedro II, presented a gold medal to Father Azevedo
for this invention. Many Brazilian people as well as the Brazilian federal
government recognize Fr. Azevedo as the inventor of the typewriter, a claim that
has been the subject of some controversy.[17]
In 1865, John Jonathon Pratt, of Centre, Alabama (US), built a machine called the
Pterotype which appeared in an 1867 Scientiﬁc American article[18] and inspired
other inventors.
Between 1864 and 1867, Peter Mitterhofer, a carpenter from South Tyrol (then part
of Austria) developed several models and a fully functioning prototype typewriter
in 1867.[19]
Hansen Writing Ball
In 1865, Rev. Rasmus Malling-Hansen of Denmark invented the Hansen Writing Ball,
which went into commercial production in 1870 and was the ﬁrst commercially sold
typewriter. It was a success in Europe and was reported as being used in oﬀices in
London as late as 1909.[20][21] Malling-Hansen used a solenoid escapement to return
the carriage on some of his models which makes him a candidate for the title of
inventor of the ﬁrst "electric" typewriter.

According to the book Hvem er skrivekuglens opﬁnder?
(English: Who is the inventor of the Writing Ball?), written
by Malling-Hansen's daughter, Johanne Agerskov, in 1865,
Malling-Hansen made a porcelain model of the keyboard of
his writing ball and experimented with diﬀerent placements
of the letters to achieve the fastest writing speed. MallingHansen placed the letters on short pistons that went
directly through the ball and down to the paper. This,
together with the placement of the letters so that the fastest
writing ﬁngers struck the most frequently used letters,
made the Hansen Writing Ball the ﬁrst typewriter to
produce text substantially faster than a person could write
by hand.
The Hansen Writing Ball was produced with only upper-case
characters. The Writing Ball was used as a template for
inventor Frank Haven Hall to create a derivative that would
produce letter prints cheaper and faster.[22][23][24]

Hansen Writing Ball was
the ﬁrst typewriter
manufactured
commercially (1870)

Malling-Hansen developed his typewriter further through the 1870s and 1880s and
made many improvements, but the writing head remained the same. On the ﬁrst
model of the writing ball from 1870, the paper was attached to a cylinder inside a
wooden box. In 1874, the cylinder was replaced by a carriage, moving beneath the
writing head. Then, in 1875, the well-known "tall model" was patented, which was
the ﬁrst of the writing balls that worked without electricity. Malling-Hansen attended
the world exhibitions in Vienna in 1873 and Paris in 1878 and he received the ﬁrstprize for his invention at both exhibitions.[25][26][27]
Sholes and Glidden typewriter
The ﬁrst typewriter to be commercially successful was
patented in 1868 by Americans Christopher Latham Sholes,
Frank Haven Hall, Carlos Glidden and Samuel W. Soule in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin,[28] although Sholes soon disowned
the machine and refused to use or even recommend it. It
looked "like something like a cross between a piano and a
kitchen table".[29] The working prototype was made by the
machinist Matthias Schwalbach.[30][31][32] The patent (US
79,265) was sold for $12,000 to Densmore and Yost, who
made an agreement with E. Remington and Sons (then
famous as a manufacturer of sewing machines) to
commercialize the machine as the Sholes and Glidden TypeWriter.

Prototype of the Sholes
and Glidden typewriter,
the ﬁrst commercially
successful typewriter,
and the ﬁrst with a
QWERTY keyboard
(1873)

This was the origin of the term typewriter. Remington
began production of its ﬁrst typewriter on March 1, 1873, in
Ilion, New York. It had a QWERTY keyboard layout, which,
because of the machine's success, was slowly adopted by
other typewriter manufacturers. As with most other early
typewriters, because the typebars strike upwards, the typist could not see the
characters as they were typed.

Index typewriter
Coming into the market in the early 1880s,[33] the
index typewriter uses a pointer or stylus to choose a
letter from an index. The pointer is mechanically
linked so that the letter chosen could then be printed,
most often by the activation of a lever.
The index typewriter was brieﬂy popular in niche
markets. Although they were slower than keyboard
type machines they were mechanically simpler and
lighter,[33] they were therefore marketed as being
suitable for travellers,[33] and because they could be
produced more cheaply than keyboard machines, as
A Mignon Model 4 index
budget machines for users who needed to produce
typewriter from 1924
small quantities of typed correspondence.[33] The
index typewriter's niche appeal however soon
disappeared, as on the one hand new keyboard typewriters became lighter and more
portable and on the other refurbished second hand machines began to become
available.[33] The last widely available western index machine was the Mignon
typewriter produced by AEG which was produced until 1934. Considered one of the
very best of the index typewriters, part of the Mignon's popularity was that it
featured both interchangeable indexes and type,[34] allowing the use of diﬀerent
fonts and character sets,[34] something very few keyboard machines allowed and
only at considerable added cost.[34]
Although pushed out of the market in most of the world by keyboard machines,
successful Japanese and Chinese typewriters are of the index type albeit with a very
much larger index and number of type elements.

Standardization
By about 1910, the "manual" or "mechanical" typewriter had reached a somewhat
standardized design. There were minor variations from one manufacturer to another,
but most typewriters followed the concept that each key was attached to a typebar
that had the corresponding letter molded, in reverse, into its striking head. When a
key was struck briskly and ﬁrmly, the typebar hit a ribbon (usually made of inked
fabric), making a printed mark on the paper wrapped around a cylindrical platen.
The platen was mounted on a carriage that moved left or right, automatically
advancing the typing position horizontally after each character was typed. The paper,
rolled around the typewriter's platen, was then advanced vertically by the carriagereturn lever (at the far left, or on the far right for left handed typewriters) into
position for each new line of text. A small bell was struck a few characters before the
right hand margin was reached to warn the operator to complete the word and then
use the carriage-return lever to shift the paper back to the beginning of the next
line.[35]
Frontstriking

In most of the early typewriters, the typebars struck upward against the paper,
pressed against the bottom of the platen, so the typist could not see the text as it was
typed. What was typed was not visible until a carriage return caused it to scroll into
view. The diﬀiculty with any other arrangement was ensuring the typebars fell back
into place reliably when the key was released. This was eventually achieved with
various ingenious mechanical designs and so-called "visible typewriters" which used
frontstriking, in which the typebars struck forward against the front side of the
platen, became standard.
One of the ﬁrst was the Daugherty Visible, introduced in 1893, which also introduced
the four-bank keyboard that became standard, although the Underwood which came
out two years later was the ﬁrst major typewriter with these features.[36][37]
However, older "nonvisible" models continued in production to as late as 1915.
Shift key
A signiﬁcant innovation was the shift key, introduced
with the Remington No. 2 in 1878. This key physically
"shifted" either the basket of typebars, in which case
the typewriter is described as "basket shift", or the
paper-holding carriage, in which case the typewriter
is described as "carriage shift". Either mechanism
caused a diﬀerent portion of the typebar to come in
contact with the ribbon/platen. The result is that each
Comparison of full-keyboard,
typebar could type two diﬀerent characters, cutting
single-shift, and double-shift
the number of keys and typebars in half (and
typewriters in 1911
simplifying the internal mechanisms considerably).
The obvious use for this was to allow letter keys to
type both upper and lower case, but normally the
number keys were also duplexed, allowing access to special symbols such as percent,
⟨%⟩, and ampersand, ⟨&⟩.
Before the shift key, typewriters had to have a separate key and typebar for uppercase letters; in essence, the typewriter had two keyboards, one above the other. With
the shift key, manufacturing costs (and therefore purchase price) were greatly
reduced, and typist operation was simpliﬁed; both factors contributed greatly to
mass adoption of the technology. Certain models, such as the Barlet, had a double
shift so that each key performed three functions. These little three-row machines
were portable and could be used by journalists.
However, because the shift key required more force to push (its mechanism was
moving a much larger mass than other keys), and was operated by the little ﬁnger
(normally the weakest ﬁnger on the hand), it was diﬀicult to hold the shift down for
more than two or three consecutive strokes. The "shift lock" key (the precursor to
the modern caps lock) allowed the shift operation to be maintained indeﬁnitely.
Tab key
To facilitate typewriter use in business settings, a tab (tabulator) key was added in
the late nineteenth century. Before using the key, the operator had to set mechanical
"tab stops", pre-designated locations to which the carriage would advance when the
tab key was pressed. This facilitated the typing of columns of numbers, freeing the

operator from the need to manually position the carriage. The ﬁrst models had one
tab stop and one tab key; later ones allowed as many stops as desired, and
sometimes had multiple tab keys, each of which moved the carriage a diﬀerent
number of spaces ahead of the decimal point (the tab stop), to facilitate the typing of
columns with numbers of diﬀerent length ($1.00, $10.00, $100.00, etc.)
Dead keys
Languages such as French, Spanish, and German required diacritics, special signs
attached to or on top of the base letter: for example, a combination of the acute
accent ⟨´⟩ plus ⟨e⟩ produced ⟨é⟩; ⟨~⟩ plus ⟨n⟩ produced ⟨ñ⟩. In metal typesetting, ⟨é⟩,
⟨ñ⟩, and others were separate sorts. With mechanical typewriters, the number of
whose characters (sorts) was constrained by the physical limits of the machine, the
number of keys required was reduced by the use of dead keys. Diacritics such as ⟨´⟩
(acute accent) would be assigned to a dead key, which did not move the platen
forward, permitting another character to be imprinted at the same location; thus a
single dead key such as the acute accent could be combined with ⟨a⟩,⟨e⟩,⟨i⟩,⟨o⟩ and
⟨u⟩ to produce ⟨á⟩,⟨é⟩,⟨í⟩,⟨ó⟩ and ⟨ú⟩, reducing the number of sorts needed from 5 to 1.
The typebars of "normal" characters struck a rod as they moved the metal character
desired toward the ribbon and platen, and each rod depression moved the platen
forward the width of one character. Dead keys had a typebar shaped so as not to
strike the rod.
The tilde character, ⟨~⟩, never seen in isolation in metal typesetting, became a
separate character in ASCII as a result of its use on dead keys for Spanish and
Portuguese (see Tilde#Role of mechanical typewriters).
Character sizes
In English-speaking countries, ordinary typewriters printing ﬁxed-width characters
were standardized to print six horizontal lines per vertical inch, and had either of
two variants of character width, one called pica for ten characters per horizontal
inch and the other elite, for twelve. This diﬀered from the use of these terms in
printing, where pica is a linear unit (approximately 1⁄6 of an inch) used for any
measurement, the most common one being the height of a type face.
Some typewriters were designed to print extra-large type (commonly double height,
double width) for labelling purposes. Classiﬁcation numbers on books in libraries
could be done this way.
Color
Some ribbons were inked in black and red stripes, each being half the width and
running the entire length of the ribbon. A lever on most machines allowed switching
between colors, which was useful for bookkeeping entries where negative amounts
were highlighted in red. The red color was also used on some selected characters in
running text, for emphasis. When a typewriter had this facility, it could still be ﬁtted
with a solid black ribbon; the lever was then used to switch to fresh ribbon when the
ﬁrst stripe ran out of ink. Some typewriters also had a third position which stopped

the ribbon being struck at all. This enabled the keys to hit the paper unobstructed,
and was used for cutting stencils for stencil duplicators (aka mimeograph
machines).[38]
"Noiseless" designs
In the early part of the 20th century, a typewriter was marketed under the name
Noiseless and advertised as "silent". It was developed by Wellington Parker Kidder
and the ﬁrst model was marketed by the Noiseless Typewriter Company in 1917. An
agreement with Remington in 1924 saw production transferred to Remington, and a
further agreement in 1929 allowed Underwood to produce it as well.[39] Noiseless
portables sold well in the 1930s and 1940s, and noiseless standards continued to be
manufactured until the 1960s.[40]
In a conventional typewriter the typebar reaches the end of its travel simply by
striking the ribbon and paper. A "noiseless" typewriter has a complex lever
mechanism that decelerates the typebar mechanically before pressing it against the
ribbon and paper[39] in an attempt to dampen the noise. It certainly reduced the
high-frequency content of the sound, rendering it more of a "clunk" than a "clack"
and arguably less intrusive, but such advertising claims as "A machine that can be
operated a few feet away from your desk – And not be heard" were not true.

Electric designs
Although electric typewriters would not achieve widespread popularity until nearly a
century later, the basic groundwork for the electric typewriter was laid by the
Universal Stock Ticker, invented by Thomas Edison in 1870. This device remotely
printed letters and numbers on a stream of paper tape from input generated by a
specially designed typewriter at the other end of a telegraph line.
Early electric models
Some electric typewriters were patented in the 19th century, but the ﬁrst machine
known to be produced in series is the Cahill of 1900.[41]
Another electric typewriter was produced by the Blickensderfer Manufacturing
Company, of Stamford, Connecticut, in 1902. Like the manual Blickensderfer
typewriters, it used a cylindrical typewheel rather than individual typebars. The
machine was produced in several variants but apparently it was not a commercial
success, for reasons that are unclear.[42]
The next step in the development of the electric typewriter came in 1910, when
Charles and Howard Krum ﬁled a patent for the ﬁrst practical teletypewriter.[43] The
Krums' machine, named the Morkrum Printing Telegraph, used a typewheel rather
than individual typebars. This machine was used for the ﬁrst commercial
teletypewriter system on Postal Telegraph Company lines between Boston and New
York City in 1910.[44]
James Fields Smathers of Kansas City invented what is considered the ﬁrst practical
power-operated typewriter in 1914. In 1920, after returning from Army service, he
produced a successful model and in 1923 turned it over to the Northeast Electric

Company of Rochester for development. Northeast was interested in ﬁnding new
markets for their electric motors and developed Smathers's design so that it could be
marketed to typewriter manufacturers, and from 1925 Remington Electric
typewriters were produced powered by Northeast's motors.
After some 2,500 electric typewriters had been produced, Northeast asked
Remington for a ﬁrm contract for the next batch. However, Remington was engaged
in merger talks, which would eventually result in the creation of Remington Rand
and no executives were willing to commit to a ﬁrm order. Northeast instead decided
to enter the typewriter business for itself, and in 1929 produced the ﬁrst
Electromatic Typewriter.
In 1928, Delco, a division of General Motors, purchased Northeast Electric, and the
typewriter business was spun oﬀ as Electromatic Typewriters, Inc. In 1933,
Electromatic was acquired by IBM, which then spent $1 million on a redesign of the
Electromatic Typewriter, launching the IBM Electric Typewriter Model 01[45] in
1935. By 1958 IBM was deriving 8% of its revenue from the sale of electric
typewriters.
In 1931, an electric typewriter was introduced by Varityper Corporation. It was
called the Varityper, because a narrow cylinder-like wheel could be replaced to
change the font.[46]
Electrical typewriter designs removed the direct mechanical connection between the
keys and the element that struck the paper. Not to be confused with later electronic
typewriters, electric typewriters contained only a single electrical component — the
motor. Where the keystroke had previously moved a typebar directly, now it engaged
mechanical linkages that directed mechanical power from the motor into the typebar.
In 1941, IBM announced the Electromatic Model 04 electric typewriter, featuring the
revolutionary concept of proportional spacing. By assigning varied rather than
uniform spacing to diﬀerent sized characters, the Type 4 recreated the appearance
of a typeset page, an eﬀect that was further enhanced by including the 1937
innovation of carbon-ﬁlm ribbons that produced clearer, sharper words on the
page.[47] The proportional spacing feature became a staple of the IBM Executive
series typewriters.
IBM Selectric
IBM and Remington Rand electric typewriters were
the leading models until IBM introduced the IBM
Selectric typewriter in 1961, which replaced the
typebars with a spherical element (or typeball)
slightly smaller than a golf ball, with reverse-image
letters molded into its surface. The Selectric used a
system of latches, metal tapes, and pulleys are driven
by an electric motor to rotate the ball into the correct
position and then strike it against the ribbon and
platen. The typeball moved laterally in front of the
paper, instead of the previous designs using a platencarrying carriage moving the paper across a
stationary print position.

IBM Selectric II (dual
Latin/Hebrew typeball and
keyboard)

Due to the physical similarity, the typeball was sometimes
referred to as a "golfball".[48] The typeball design had many
advantages, especially the elimination of "jams" (when more
than one key was struck at once and the typebars became
entangled) and in the ability to change the typeball,
allowing multiple fonts to be used in a single document.
The IBM Selectric became a commercial success,
dominating the oﬀice typewriter market for at least two
decades. IBM also gained an advantage by marketing more
heavily to schools than did Remington, with the idea that
students who learned to type on a Selectric would later
choose IBM typewriters over the competition in the
workplace as businesses replaced their old manual models.
By the 1970s, IBM had succeeded in establishing the
Selectric as the de facto standard typewriter in mid- to
high-end oﬀice environments, replacing the raucous "clack"
of older typebar machines with the quieter sound of
gyrating typeballs.

Replaceable IBM typeballs with
clip

Selectric II dual
Latin/Hebrew Hadar
typeball

Later models of IBM Executives and Selectrics
replaced inked fabric ribbons with "carbon ﬁlm"
ribbons that had a dry black or colored powder on a
clear plastic tape. These could be used only once, but
later models used a cartridge that was simple to
replace. A side eﬀect of this technology was that the
text typed on the machine could be easily read from
the used ribbon, raising issues where the machines
were used for preparing classiﬁed documents
(ribbons had to be accounted for to ensure that
typists did not carry them from the facility).[49]

A variation known as
"Correcting Selectrics"
introduced a correction feature, where a sticky tape
in front of the carbon ﬁlm ribbon could remove the
Composer output showing
black-powdered image of a typed character,
Roman, Bold and Italic fonts
eliminating the need for little bottles of white dab-on
available by changing the type
correction ﬂuid and for hard erasers that could tear
ball
the paper. These machines also introduced selectable
"pitch" so that the typewriter could be switched
between pica type (10 characters per inch) and elite type (12 per inch), even within
one document. Even so, all Selectrics were monospaced—each character and
letterspace was allotted the same width on the page, from a capital "W" to a period.
Although IBM had produced a successful typebar-based machine with ﬁve levels of
proportional spacing, called the IBM Executive,[50] proportional spacing was not
provided with the Selectric typewriter or its successors the Selectric II and Selectric
III.
The only fully electromechanical Selectric Typewriter with fully proportional spacing
and which used a Selectric type element was the expensive Selectric Composer,
which was capable of right-margin justiﬁcation (typing each line twice was required,

once to calculate and again to print) and was considered a typesetting machine
rather than a typewriter. Composer typeballs physically resembled those of the
Selectric typewriter but were not interchangeable.
In addition to its electronic successors, the Magnetic Tape Selectric Composer
(MT/SC), the Mag Card Selectric Composer, and the Electronic Selectric Composer,
IBM also made electronic typewriters with proportional spacing using the Selectric
element that were considered typewriters or word processors instead of typesetting
machines.
The ﬁrst of these was the relatively obscure Mag Card Executive, which used 88character elements. Later, some of the same typestyles used for it were used on the
96-character elements used on the IBM Electronic Typewriter 50 and the later
models 65 and 85.
By 1970, as oﬀset printing began to replace letterpress printing, the Composer
would be adapted as the output unit for a typesetting system. The system included a
computer-driven input station to capture the key strokes on magnetic tape and insert
the operator's format commands, and a Composer unit to read the tape and produce
the formatted text for photo reproduction.
Advantages:
reasonably fast, jam-free, and reliable
relatively quiet, and more importantly, free of major vibrations
could produce high quality lower- and upper-case output, compared to competitors
such as Teletype machines
could be activated by a short, low-force mechanical action, allowing easier
interfacing to electronic controls
did not require the movement of a heavy "type basket" to shift between lower- and
upper-case, allowing higher speed without heavy impacts
did not require the platen roller assembly to move from side to side (a problem
with continuous-feed paper used for automated printing)
The IBM 2741 terminal was a popular example of a Selectric-based computer
terminal, and similar mechanisms were employed as the console devices for many
IBM System/360 computers. These mechanisms used "ruggedized" designs
compared to those in standard oﬀice typewriters.
Later electric models
Some of IBM's advances were later adopted in less expensive machines from
competitors. For example, Smith-Corona electric typewriters introduced in 1973
switched to interchangeable Coronamatic (SCM-patented) ribbon cartridges,[51]
including fabric, ﬁlm, erasing, and two-color versions. At about the same time, the
advent of photocopying meant that carbon copies, correction ﬂuid and erasers were
less and less necessary; only the original need be typed, and photocopies made from
it.

Typewriter/printer hybrids

Towards the end of the commercial popularity of typewriters in the 1970s, a number
of hybrid designs combining features of printers were introduced. These often
incorporated keyboards from existing models of typewriters and printing
mechanisms of dot-matrix printers. The generation of teleprinters with impact pinbased printing engines was not adequate for the demanding quality required for
typed output, and alternative thermal transfer technologies used in thermal label
printers had become technically feasible for typewriters.
IBM produced a series of typewriters called Thermotronic with letter-quality output
and correcting tape along with printers tagged Quietwriter. Brother extended the life
of their typewriter product line with similar products. The development of these
proprietary printing engines provided the vendors with exclusive markets in
consumable ribbons and the ability to use standardized printing engines with varying
degrees of electronic and software sophistication to develop product lines. Although
these changes reduced prices—and greatly increased the convenience—of
typewriters, the technological disruption posed by word processors left these
improvements with only a short-term low-end market. To extend the life of these
products, many examples were provided with communication ports to connect them
to computers as printers.
Electronic typewriters
The ﬁnal major development of the typewriter was the electronic typewriter. Most of
these replaced the typeball with a plastic or metal daisy wheel mechanism (a disk
with the letters molded on the outside edge of the "petals"). The daisy wheel concept
ﬁrst emerged in printers developed by Diablo Systems in the 1970s. The ﬁrst
electronic daisywheel typewriter marketed in the world (in 1976) is the Olivetti Tes
501, and subsequently in 1978, the Olivetti ET101 (with function display) and Olivetti
TES 401 (with text display and ﬂoppy disk for memory storage). This has allowed
Olivetti to maintain the world record in the design of electronic typewriters,
proposing increasingly advanced and performing models in the following years.[52].
In 1981, Xerox Corporation, who by then had bought Diablo Systems, introduced a
line of electronic typewriters incorporating this technology (the Memorywriter
product line). For a time, these products were quite successful as their daisy-wheel
mechanism was much simpler and cheaper than either typebar or Selectric
mechanisms, and their electronic memory and display allowed the user to easily see
errors and correct them before they were actually printed. One problem with the
plastic daisy wheel was that they were not always durable. To solve this problem,
more durable metal daisy wheels were made available (but at a slightly higher price).
These and similar electronic typewriters were in essence dedicated word processors
with either single-line LCD displays or multi-line CRT displays, built-in line editors in
ROM, a spelling and grammar checker, a few kilobytes of internal RAM and optional
cartridge, magnetic card or diskette external memory-storage devices for storing
text and even document formats. Text could be entered a line or paragraph at a time
and edited using the display and built-in software tools before being committed to
paper.
Unlike the Selectrics and earlier models, these really were "electronic" and relied on
integrated circuits and multiple electromechanical components. These typewriters
were sometimes called display typewriters,[53] dedicated word processors or wordprocessing typewriters, though the latter term was also frequently applied to less

sophisticated machines that featured only a tiny, sometimes just single-row display.
Sophisticated models were also called word processors, though today that term
almost always denotes a type of software program. Manufacturers of such machines
included Olivetti (TES501, ﬁrst totally electronic Olivetti word processor with
daisywheel and ﬂoppy disk in 1976; TES621 in 1979 etc.), Brother (Brother WP1 and
WP500 etc., where WP stood for word processor), Canon (Canon Cat), Smith-Corona
(PWP, i.e. Personal Word Processor line)[54] and Philips/Magnavox (VideoWriter).

Electronic
typewriter – the
ﬁnal
stage
in
typewriter
development.
A
1989
Canon
Typestar 110

The Brother WP1,
an
electronic
typewriter
complete with a
small screen and
a
ﬂoppy
disk
reader

Decline
The 1970s and early 1980s were a time of transition for typewriters and word
processors. At one point in time, most small-business oﬀices would be completely
"old-style", while large corporations and government departments would already be
"new-style"; other oﬀices would have a mixture. The pace of change was so rapid
that it was common for clerical staﬀ to have to learn several new systems, one after
the other, in just a few years. While such rapid change is commonplace today, and is
taken for granted, this was not always so; in fact, typewriting technology changed
very little in its ﬁrst 80 or 90 years.
Due to falling sales, IBM sold its typewriter division in 1991 to the newly formed
Lexmark, completely exiting from a market it once dominated.
The increasing dominance of personal computers, desktop publishing, the
introduction of low-cost, truly high-quality laser and inkjet printer technologies, and
the pervasive use of web publishing, e-mail and other electronic communication
techniques have largely replaced typewriters in the United States. Still, as of 2009,
typewriters continued to be used by a number of government agencies and other
institutions in the US, where they are primarily used to ﬁll preprinted forms.
According to a Boston typewriter repairman quoted by The Boston Globe, "Every
maternity ward has a typewriter, as well as funeral homes".[55] A fairly major
typewriter user is the City of New York, which in 2008 purchased several thousand
typewriters, mostly for use by the New York Police Department, at the total cost of

$982,269. Another $99,570 was spent in 2009 for the maintenance of the existing
typewriters. New York police oﬀicers would use the machines to type property and
evidence vouchers on carbon paper forms.[56]
A rather specialized market for typewriters exists due to the regulations of many
correctional systems in the US, where prisoners are prohibited from having
computers or telecommunication equipment, but are allowed to own typewriters. The
Swintec corporation (headquartered in Moonachie, New Jersey), which, as of 2011,
still produced typewriters at its overseas factories (in Japan, Indonesia, and/or
Malaysia), manufactures a variety of typewriters for use in prisons, made of clear
plastic (to make it harder for prisoners to hide prohibited items inside it). As of 2011,
the company had contracts with prisons in 43 US states.[57][58]
In April 2011, Godrej and Boyce, a Mumbai-based manufacturer of mechanical
typewriters, closed its doors, leading to a ﬂurry of news reports that the "world's last
typewriter factory" had shut down.[59] The reports were quickly contested, with
opinions settling to agree that it was indeed the world's last producer of manual
typewriter.[60][61][62][63]
In November 2012, Brother's UK factory manufactured what it claimed to be the last
typewriter ever made in the UK; the typewriter was donated to the London Science
Museum.[64]
Russian typewriters use Cyrillic, which has made the ongoing Azerbaijani
reconversion from Cyrillic to Latin alphabet more diﬀicult. In 1997, the government
of Turkey oﬀered to donate western typewriters to the Republic of Azerbaijan in
exchange for more zealous and exclusive promotion of the Latin alphabet for the
Azerbaijani language; this oﬀer, however, was declined.
In Latin America and Africa, mechanical typewriters are still common because they
can be used without electrical power. In Latin America, the typewriters used are
most often Brazilian models; Brazil continues to produce mechanical (Facit) and
electronic (Olivetti) typewriters to the present day.[65]
The 21st century has seen a revival of interest in typewriters among certain
subcultures, including makers, steampunks, hipsters, and street poets.[66]

Correction technologies
According to the standards taught in secretarial schools in the mid-20th century, a
business letter was supposed to have no mistakes and no visible corrections.
Accuracy was prized as much as speed. Indeed, typing speeds, as scored in
proﬁciency tests and typewriting speed competitions, included a deduction of ten
words for every mistake. Corrections were, of course, necessary, and many methods
were developed.
In practice, several methods would often be combined. For example, if six extra
copies of a letter were needed, the ﬂuid-corrected original would be photocopied, but
only for the two recipients getting a c.c.; the other four copies, the less-important ﬁle
copies that stayed in various departments at the oﬀice, would be cheaper, hand-

erased, less-distinct bond paper copies or even "ﬂimsies" of diﬀerent colors (tissue
papers interleaved with black carbon paper) that were all typed as a "carbon pack"
at the same time as the original.
In informal applications such as personal letters where low priority was placed on
the appearance of the document, or conversely in highly formal applications in which
it was important that any corrections be obvious, the backspace key could be used to
back up over the error and then overstrike it with hyphens, slashes, Xs, or the like.

Typewriter erasers
The traditional erasing method involved the use of a special
typewriter eraser made of hard rubber that contained an
abrasive material. Some were thin, ﬂat disks, pink or gray,
approximately 2 inches (51 mm) in diameter by 1⁄8 inch
(3.2 mm) thick, with a brush attached from the center, while
others looked like pink pencils, with a sharpenable eraser at
the "lead" end and a stiﬀ nylon brush at the other end.
Either way, these tools made possible erasure of individual
typed letters. Business letters were typed on heavyweight,
high-rag-content bond paper, not merely to provide a
luxurious appearance, but also to stand up to erasure.

Triumph typewriter
eraser (1960)

Typewriter eraser brushes were necessary for clearing
eraser crumbs and paper dust, and using the brush properly was an important
element of typewriting skill; if erasure detritus fell into the typewriter, a small
buildup could cause the typebars to jam in their narrow supporting grooves.

Eraser shield
Erasing a set of carbon copies was particularly diﬀicult, and called for the use of a
device called an eraser shield (a thin stainless-steel rectangle about 2 by 3 inches (51
by 76 mm) with several tiny holes in it) to prevent the pressure of erasing on the
upper copies from producing carbon smudges on the lower copies. To correct copies,
typists had to go from carbon copy to carbon copy, trying not to get their ﬁngers
dirty as they leafed through the carbon papers, and moving and repositioning the
eraser shield and eraser for each copy.

Erasable bond
Paper companies produced a special form of typewriter paper called erasable bond
(for example, Eaton's Corrasable Bond). This incorporated a thin layer of material
that prevented ink from penetrating and was relatively soft and easy to remove from
the page. An ordinary soft pencil eraser could quickly produce perfect erasures on
this kind of paper. However, the same characteristics that made the paper erasable
made the characters subject to smudging due to ordinary friction and deliberate
alteration after the fact, making it unacceptable for business correspondence,
contracts, or any archival use.

Correction ﬂuid
In the 1950s and 1960s, correction ﬂuid made its appearance, under brand names
such as Liquid Paper, Wite-Out and Tipp-Ex; it was invented by Bette Nesmith
Graham. Correction ﬂuid was a kind of opaque, white, fast-drying paint that
produced a fresh white surface onto which, when dry, a correction could be retyped.
However, when held to the light, the covered-up characters were visible, as was the
patch of dry correction ﬂuid (which was never perfectly ﬂat, and frequently not a
perfect match for the color, texture, and luster of the surrounding paper). The
standard trick for solving this problem was photocopying the corrected page, but this
was possible only with high quality photocopiers.
A diﬀerent ﬂuid was available for correcting stencils. It sealed up the stencil ready
for retyping but did not attempt to color match.[67]

Dry correction
Dry correction products (such as correction paper) under brand names such as "KoRec-Type" were introduced in the 1970s and functioned like white carbon paper. A
strip of the product was placed over the letters needing correction, and the incorrect
letters were retyped, causing the black character to be overstruck with a white
overcoat. Similar material was soon incorporated in carbon-ﬁlm electric typewriter
ribbons; like the traditional two-color black-and-red inked ribbon common on manual
typewriters, a black and white correcting ribbon became commonplace on electric
typewriters. But the black or white coating could be partly rubbed oﬀ with handling,
so such corrections were generally not acceptable in legal documents.
The pinnacle of this kind of technology was the IBM Electronic Typewriter series.
These machines, and similar products from other manufacturers, used a separate
correction ribbon and a character memory. With a single keystroke, the typewriter
was capable of automatically backspacing and then overstriking the previous
characters with minimal marring of the paper. White cover-up ribbons were used
with fabric ink ribbons, or an alternate premium design featured plastic lift-oﬀ
correction ribbons which were used with carbon ﬁlm typing ribbons. This latter
technology actually lifted the carbon ﬁlm forming a typed letter, leaving nothing
more than a ﬂattened depression in the surface of the paper, with the advantage that
no color matching of the paper was needed.

Legacy
Keyboard layouts
QWERTY
The 1874 Sholes & Glidden typewriters established the "QWERTY" layout for the
letter keys. During the period in which Sholes and his colleagues were
experimenting with this invention, other keyboard arrangements were apparently
tried, but these are poorly documented.[68] The QWERTY layout of keys has become
the de facto standard for English-language typewriter and computer keyboards.

Other languages written in the Latin alphabet
sometimes use variants of the QWERTY layouts, such
as the French AZERTY, the Italian QZERTY and the
German QWERTZ layouts.
The QWERTY layout is not the most eﬀicient layout
possible for the English language, since it requires a
touch-typist to move his or her ﬁngers between rows
to type the most common letters. Although the
QWERTY keyboard was the most commonly used
layout in typewriters, a better, less strenuous
keyboard was being searched for throughout the late
1900s.[69]
One popular but unveriﬁed[5] explanation for the
QWERTY arrangement is that it was designed to
reduce the likelihood of internal clashing of typebars
by placing commonly used combinations of letters
farther from each other inside the machine.[70][71]

The "QWERTY" layout of
typewriter keys became a de
facto standard and continues to
be used long after the reasons
for its adoption (including
reduction of key/lever
entanglements) have ceased to
apply.

Other layouts
A number of radically diﬀerent layouts such as Dvorak have been proposed to reduce
the perceived ineﬀiciencies of QWERTY, but none have been able to displace the
QWERTY layout; their proponents claim considerable advantages, but so far none
has been widely used. The Blickensderfer typewriter with its DHIATENSOR layout
may have possibly been the ﬁrst attempt at optimizing the keyboard layout for
eﬀiciency advantages.[72]
Many non-Latin alphabets have keyboard layouts that have nothing to do with
QWERTY. The Russian layout, for instance, puts the common trigrams ыва, про, and
ить on adjacent keys so that they can be typed by rolling the ﬁngers. The Greek
layout, on the other hand, is a variant of QWERTY.
Typewriters were also made for East Asian languages with thousands of characters,
such as Chinese or Japanese. They were not easy to operate, but professional typists
used them for a long time until the development of electronic word processors and
laser printers in the 1980s.
On modern keyboards, the exclamation point is the shifted character on the 1 key, a
direct result of the historical fact that these were the last characters to become
"standard" on keyboards. Holding the spacebar pressed down usually suspended the
carriage advance mechanism (a so-called "dead key" feature), allowing one to
superimpose multiple keystrikes on a single location. The ¢ symbol (meaning cents)
was located above the number 6 on electric typewriters, while ASCII computer
keyboards have ^ instead.

Typewriter conventions
A number of typographical conventions originate from the widespread use of the
typewriter, based on the characteristics and limitations of the typewriter itself. For
example, the QWERTY keyboard typewriter did not include keys for the en dash and

the em dash. To overcome this limitation, users
typically typed more than one adjacent hyphen to
approximate
these
symbols.
This
typewriter
convention is still sometimes used today, even though
modern computer word processing applications can
input the correct en and em dashes for each font
type.[73] Double hyphens are also standard in Western
comics lettering despite historically being done by
hand.
Other examples of typewriter practices that are
sometimes still used in desktop publishing systems
include
inserting
a
double
space
between
sentences,[74][75] and the use of the typewriter
apostrophe, ⟨'⟩, and straight quotes, ⟨"⟩, as quotation
marks and prime marks.[76] The practice of
underlining text in place of italics and the use of all
capitals to provide emphasis are additional examples
of typographical conventions that derived from the
limitations of the typewriter keyboard that still carry
on today.[77]

This typed page uses a number
of typographic conventions
stemming from the mechanical
limitations of the typewriter:
two hyphens in place of an em
dash, double sentence spacing,
straight quotation marks, tab
indents for paragraphs, and
double carriage returns
between paragraphs

Many older typewriters did not include a separate key
for the numeral ⟨1⟩ or the exclamation point ⟨!⟩, and
some even older ones also lacked the numeral zero,
⟨0⟩. Typists who trained on these machines learned
the habit of using the lowercase letter ⟨l⟩ ("ell") for
the digit ⟨1⟩, and the uppercase ⟨O⟩ ('oh') for the zero.
A cents symbol, ⟨¢⟩ was created by combining (over-striking) a lower case ⟨c⟩ with a
slash character (typing ⟨c⟩, then backspace, then ⟨/⟩).
Similarly, the exclamation point was created by combining an apostrophe and a
period ( ' + . ≈⟨!⟩).[78] These characters were omitted to simplify design and reduce
manufacturing and maintenance costs; they were chosen speciﬁcally because they
were "redundant" and could be recreated using other keys.

Terminology
Some terminology from the typewriter age has survived into the personal computer
era. Examples include:
backspace (BS) – a keystroke that moved the cursor backwards one position (on a
physical platen, this is the exact opposite of the space key), for the purpose of
overtyping a character. This could be for combining characters (e.g. an apostrophe,
backspace, and period make an exclamation point—a character missing on some
early typewriters), or for correction such as with the correcting tape that developed
later.
carriage return (CR) – return to the ﬁrst column of text and, in some systems,
switch to the next line.
cursor – a marker used to indicate where the next character will be printed. The
cursor, however, was originally a term to describe the clear slider on a slide rule.

cut and paste – taking text, a numerical table, or an image and pasting it into a
document. The term originated when such compound documents were created
using manual paste up techniques for typographic page layout. Actual brushes and
paste were later replaced by hot-wax machines equipped with cylinders that
applied melted adhesive wax to developed prints of "typeset" copy. This copy was
then cut out with knives and rulers, and slid into position on layout sheets on
slanting layout tables. After the "copy" had been correctly positioned and squared
up using a T-square and set square, it was pressed down with a brayer, or roller.
The whole point of the exercise was to create so-called "camera-ready copy" which
existed only to be photographed and then printed, usually by oﬀset lithography.
dead key – a key that, when typed, does not advance the typing position, thus
allowing another character to be overstruck on top of the original character. This
was typically used to combine diacritical marks with letters they modiﬁed (e.g. è
can be generated by ﬁrst pressing ` and then e ). The dead key feature was often
implemented mechanically by having the typist press and hold the space bar while
typing the characters to be superimposed.
line feed (LF), also called "newline" – moving the cursor to the next on-screen line
of text in a word processor document.
shift – a modiﬁer key used to type capital letters and other alternate "upper case"
characters; when pressed and held down, would shift a typewriter's mechanism to
allow a diﬀerent typebar impression (such as 'D' instead of 'd') to press into the
ribbon and print on a page. The concept of a shift key or modiﬁer key was later
extended to Ctrl, Alt, and Super ("Windows" or "Apple") keys on modern computer
keyboards. The generalized concept of a shift key reached its apex in the MIT
space-cadet keyboard.
tab (HT), shortened from "horizontal tab" or "tabulator stop" – caused the print
position to advance horizontally to the next pre-set "tab stop". This was used for
typing lists and tables with vertical columns of numbers or words. The related term
"vertical tab" (VT) never came into widespread use.
tty, short for teletypewriter – used in Unix-like operating systems to designate a
given "terminal".
In the above listing, the two-letter codes in parentheses are abbreviations for the
ASCII characters derived from typewriter usage.

Social eﬀects
When Remington started marketing typewriters, the
company assumed the machine would not be used for
composing but for transcribing dictation, and that the
person typing would be a woman. The 1800s Sholes and
Glidden typewriter had ﬂoral ornamentation on the case.[79]

Humorous "Get out!
Can't you see I'm busy"
postcard (1900s)

During World War I and II, increasing numbers of women
were entering the workforce. In the United States, women
often started in the professional workplace as typists.
Questions about morals made a salacious businessman
making sexual advances to a female typist into a cliché of
oﬀice life, appearing in vaudeville and movies. Being a
typist was considered the right choice for a "good girl",

meaning women who present themselves as being chaste and having good
conduct.[80] According to the 1900 census, 94.9% of stenographers and typists were
unmarried women.[81]
The "Tijuana bibles" – adult comic books produced in Mexico for the American
market, starting in the 1930s – often featured women typists. In one panel, a
businessman in a three-piece suit, ogling his secretary's thigh, says, "Miss Higby, are
you ready for—ahem!—er—dictation?"[40]
The typewriter was a useful machine during the censorship era of the Soviet
government, starting during the Russian Civil War (1917-1922). Samizdat was a form
of self-publication used when the government was censoring what literature the
public could access. The Soviet government signed a Decree on Press which
prohibited the publishing of any written work that wasn't previously read over and
approved.[82] This work was copied by hand, most often on typewriters.[83] There
was a new law in 1983 that required any owner of a typewriter needed to get police
permission to buy or keep, they would have to register a type sample of letters and
numbers to ensure that any illegal literature typed with it could be traced back to its
source.[84] The typewriter became increasingly popular as the interest in prohibited
books grew.[85]

Authors and writers who had notable relationships
with typewriters
Early adopters
Henry James dictated to a typist.[40]
Mark Twain claimed in his autobiography that he was the ﬁrst important writer to
present a publisher with a typewritten manuscript, for The Adventures of Tom
Sawyer (1876). Research showed that Twain's memory was incorrect and that the
ﬁrst book submitted in typed form was Life on the Mississippi (1883, also by
Twain).[86]

Others
William S. Burroughs wrote in some of his novels—and possibly believed—that "a
machine he called the 'Soft Typewriter' was writing our lives, and our books, into
existence", according to a book review in The New Yorker. In the ﬁlm adaptation of
his novel Naked Lunch, his typewriter is a living, insect-like entity (voiced by North
American actor Peter Boretski) and actually dictates the book to him.
Writer Zack Helm and director Mark Forster explored the potential mechanics of
the "Soft Typewriter" philosophy in the movie Stranger than Fiction, in which the
very act of typing up her handwritten notes gives a ﬁction writer the power to kill
or otherwise manipulate her main character in real life.
Ernest Hemingway used to write his books standing up in front of a Royal
typewriter suitably placed on a tall bookshelf. This typewriter, still on its bookshelf,
is kept in Finca Vigía, Hemingway's Havana house (now a museum), where he lived
until 1960, the year before his death.

J. R. R. Tolkien was likewise accustomed to typing
from awkward positions: "balancing his typewriter
on his attic bed, because there was no room on his
desk".[87] In his Foreword to The Lord of the Rings,
Tolkien stated that "the whole story ... had to be
typed, and re-typed: by me; the cost of
professional typing by the ten-ﬁngered was beyond
my means."
Jack Kerouac, a fast typist at 100 words per minute,
William Faulkner's Underwood
typed On the Road on a roll of paper so he would
Universal Portable sits in his
oﬃce at Rowan Oak, which is
not be interrupted by having to change the paper.
now maintained by the
Within two weeks of starting to write On the Road,
University of Mississippi in
Kerouac had one single-spaced paragraph, 120 feet
Oxford as a museum.
long. Some scholars say the scroll was shelf paper;
others contend it was a Thermo-fax roll; another
theory is that the roll consisted of sheets of
architect’s paper taped together.[40] His rapid work
earned the famous rebuke from Truman Capote,
"That's not writing, it's typing."
Another fast typist of the Beat Generation was
Richard Brautigan, who said that he thought out
the plots of his books in detail beforehand, then
typed them out at speeds approaching 90 to 100
words a minute.[88]
Tom Robbins waxed philosophical about the
Remington SL3, a typewriter that he bought to
A portable typewriter owned by
write Still Life with Woodpecker. He eventually did
Ernest Hemingway
away with it because it is too complicated and
inhuman for the writing of poetry.
After completing the novel Beautiful Losers,
Leonard Cohen is said to have ﬂung his typewriter into the Aegean Sea.
Don Marquis purposely used the limitations of a typewriter (or more precisely, a
particular typist) in his archy and mehitabel series of newspaper columns, which
were later compiled into a series of books. According to his literary conceit, a
cockroach named "Archy" was a reincarnated free-verse poet, who would type
articles overnight by jumping onto the keys of a manual typewriter. The writings
were typed completely in lower case, because of the cockroach's inability to
generate the heavy force needed to operate the shift key. The lone exception is the
poem "CAPITALS AT LAST" from archys life of mehitabel, written in 1933.
Author Ray Bradbury used a typewriter for rent at the library to write his work
known as Fahrenheit 451, which was published in 1953.[89]
Actor Tom Hanks uses and collects manual typewriters.[90]

Late users
Andy Rooney and William F. Buckley Jr. (1982) were among many writers who were
very reluctant to switch from typewriters to computers.
David McCullough bought a second-hand Royal typewriter in 1965 and has used it
to compose every book he has published.

Hunter S. Thompson kept a typewriter in his kitchen and is believed to have
written his "Hey, Rube!" column for ESPN.com on a typewriter. He used a
typewriter until his suicide in 2005.
Theodore Kaczynski, the Unabomber, wrote his manifesto as well as his letters on a
manual typewriter.
David Sedaris used a typewriter to write his essay collections through Me Talk
Pretty One Day at least.
Richard Polt, a philosophy professor at Xavier University in Cincinnati who collects
typewriters, edits ETCetera, a quarterly magazine about historic writing machines,
and is the author of the book The Typewriter Revolution: A Typist's Companion for
the 21st Century.[91]
William Gibson used a Hermes 2000 model manual typewriter to write
Neuromancer and half of Count Zero before a mechanical failure and lack of
replacement parts forced him to upgrade to an Apple IIc computer.[92]
Harlan Ellison has used typewriters for his entire career, and when he was no
longer able to have them repaired, learned to do it himself; he has repeatedly
stated his belief that computers are bad for writing, maintaining, "Art is not
supposed to be easier!"[93]
Author Cormac McCarthy continues to write his novels on an Olivetti Lettera 32
typewriter to the present day. In 2009, the Lettera he obtained from a pawn shop
in 1963, on which nearly all his novels and screenplays have been written, was
auctioned for charity at Christie's for US$254,500;[94] McCarthy obtained an
identical replacement for $20 to continue writing on.[95]
Will Self explains why he uses a manual typewriter: "I think the computer user
does their thinking on the screen, and the non-computer user is compelled,
because he or she has to retype a whole text, to do a lot more thinking in the
head."[96]

Typewriters in popular culture
In music
Erik Satie's 1917 score for Parade (ballet) includes a "Mach. à écrire" as a
percussion instrument, along with (elsewhere) a roulette wheel and a pistol.[97]
The composer Pablo Sorozábal includes in a scene of his zarzuela La eterna
canción (1945) a typewriter, accompanied by an orchestra and vocal soloists: the
scene is in a police station, where a policeman is deposing witnesses, and is
singing while he types the report.
The composer Leroy Anderson wrote The Typewriter (1950) for orchestra and
typewriter, and it has since been used as the theme for numerous radio programs.
The solo instrument is a real typewriter played by a percussionist. The piece was
later made famous by comedian Jerry Lewis as part of his regular routine both on
screen and stage, most notably in the 1963 ﬁlm Who's Minding the Store?.
Frank Loesser's music for the stage (1961) and screen (1967) musical How to
Succeed in Business Without Really Trying employs the typewriter as a percussion
instrument in the song "A Secretary is Not a Toy".
The clacking of typewriter keys can be heard at the beginning of Dolly Parton's
song "9 to 5". Parton has said in interviews that when writing the song, to mimic

the typing keys sound, she would run her acrylic ﬁngernails back and forth against
each other.
The song "Embassy Lament" from the 1986 musical Chess mimics the sound of
typing in the bridge.
A typewriter provides the percussive backing for Stereo Total's "Dactylo Rock", the
ﬁrst song from their 1995 debut album Oh Ah!.
A suite of songs entitled "Green Typewriters" is on The Olivia Tremor Control's
album Dusk At Cubist Castle (1996), and the sounds of typewriters can be heard in
a few of the sections.
Guster's 1999 song "Barrel of a Gun" features a typewriter as percussion.
American singer-songwriter Marian Call accompanies herself on a typewriter on
"Nerd Anthem" (c. 1998)
American musician Beck's 2005 music video for "Black Tambourine" features
typewriter characters to animate Beck's moving and playing guitar.
The title track of Heernt's 2006 album Locked in a Basement prominently features
the typewriter as a percussion instrument.
The Boston Typewriter Orchestra (BTO) has performed at numerous art festivals,
clubs, and parties since 2004.[98][99] The group consists of a half-dozen performers
who use typewriters as percussive musical instruments, under the slogan, "The
revolution will be typewritten".
South Korean improviser Ryu Hankil frequently performs typewriters, most
prominently in his 2009 album Becoming Typewriter.[100]
Lead singer and songwriter Eddie Vedder of Pearl Jam types many of the band's
lyrics on vintage typewriters.
French musician and composer Yann Tiersen makes use of a typewriter as an
instrument in some of his compositions.
The Swedish band Wintergatan uses a typewriter as a percussion instrument in
several of its pieces.

Other
In the ﬁlm The History of the Typewriter recited by Michael Winslow, voice sound
eﬀect performer Michael Winslow recreates the sounds of 32 typewriters from
history.
The word "typewriter" is often cited as the longest English word that can be typed
using only one row of keys of a QWERTY keyboard. This is untrue, since
"rupturewort" (a kind of ﬂowering plant) has 11 letters, while "typewriter" has only
10. Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary deﬁnes "uropyoureter" (12 letters).
A sentence which uses every letter of the alphabet (a pangram), "A quick brown
fox jumps over the lazy dog" can be used to check typewriters quickly.
The early Resident Evil video games use a typewriter as the save feature, and use
one ink ribbon per save.
The opening title sequence of Murder, She Wrote prominently features Jessica
Fletcher touch-typing a manuscript with a 1940s Royal KMM Manual Typewriter.
Although in one episode Fletcher rejects a character's oﬀer to sell her a computer
to replace the old Royal (which he calls a "dinosaur"), towards the series' end, she
too begins using a computer and word-processing typewriter.

In Rome the Altare della Patria, the national monument to King Victor Emmanuel II,
used to be nicknamed "the typewriter" (la macchina per scrivere in Italian)
because of its strange shape and popular dislike toward it.
The 2012 French comedy movie Populaire, starring Romain Duris and Déborah
François, centers on a young secretary in the 1950s striving to win typewriting
speed competitions.[101]
In the 2015 animated ﬁlm The Peanuts Movie, the character of Snoopy comes
across a typewriter in a dumpster and uses it to write a story about his battle with
the Red Baron, though he eventually ends up throwing it at Lucy after she insults
his story.
In the 2007 animated ﬁlm Ratatouille, old-fashioned and sternly-critical food writer
Anton Ego writes his reviews on a typewriter, which resembles a human skull in
appearance.

Forensic examination
Typewritten documents may be examined by forensic document examiners. This is
done primarily to determine 1) the make and/or model of the typewriter used to
produce a document, or 2) whether or not a particular suspect typewriter might have
been used to produce a document.[102] In some situations, an ink or correction
ribbon may also be examined.
The determination of a make and/or model of typewriter is a 'classiﬁcation' problem
and several systems have been developed for this purpose.[102] These include the
original Haas Typewriter Atlases (Pica version)[103] and (Non-Pica version)[104] and
the TYPE system developed by Dr. Philip Bouﬀard,[105] the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police's Termatrex Typewriter classiﬁcation system,[106] and Interpol's typewriter
classiﬁcation system,[107] among others.[102]
Because of the tolerances of the mechanical parts, slight variation in the alignment
of the letters and their uneven wear, each typewriter has an individual "signature" or
"ﬁngerprint", which may permit a typewritten document to be traced back to the
typewriter on which it was produced. For devices utilizing replaceable components,
such as a typeball element, any association may be restricted to a speciﬁc element,
rather than to the typewriter as a whole.
The earliest reference in ﬁctional literature to the potential identiﬁcation of a
typewriter as having produced a document was by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who
wrote the Sherlock Holmes short story "A Case of Identity" in 1891.[108] In nonﬁction, the ﬁrst document examiner[108] to describe how a typewriter might be
identiﬁed was William E. Hagan who wrote, in 1894, "All typewriter machines, even
when using the same kind of type, become more or less peculiar by use as to the
work done by them".[109] Other early discussions of the topic were provided by A. S.
Osborn in his 1908 treatise, Typewriting as Evidence,[110] and again in his 1929
textbook, Questioned Documents.[111] A modern description of the examination
procedure is laid out in ASTM Standard E2494-08 (Standard Guide for Examination
of Typewritten Items).[112]
Typewriter examination was used in the Leopold and Loeb and Alger Hiss cases. In
the Eastern Bloc, typewriters (together with printing presses, copy machines, and
later computer printers) were a controlled technology, with secret police in charge of

maintaining ﬁles of the typewriters and their owners. In the Soviet Union, the First
Department of each organization sent data on organization's typewriters to the KGB.
This posed a signiﬁcant risk for dissidents and samizdat authors. In Romania,
according to State Council Decree No. 98 of March 28, 1983, owning a typewriter,
both by businesses or by private persons, was subject to an approval given by the
local police authorities.[113] People previously convicted of any crime or those who
because of their behaviour were considered to be "a danger to public order or to the
security of the state" were refused approval.[113] In addition, once a year, typewriter
owners had to take the typewriter to the local police station, where they would be
asked to type a sample of all the typewriter's characters.[113] It was also forbidden to
borrow, lend, or repair typewriters other than at the places that had been authorized
by the police.[113]
The ribbon can be read, although only if it has not been typed over more than once.
This is not as easy as reading text from a page as the ribbon does not include spaces,
but can be done, giving every typewriter a "memory".

Gallery

Peter Mitterhofer Hansen
Writing
1864 typewriter
Ball, invented in
1865
(1870
model)

Hammond 1B, as
used
by
a
newspaper oﬃce
in
Saskatoon
around 1910

1868
patent
drawing for the
Sholes, Glidden,
and
Soule
typewriter

Hammond
1B
typewriter,
invented 1870s,
manufactured
1881

U.S.
Army Typebars
in
a
Quartermaster
1920s typewriter
soldiers
in
typewriter repair
shop,
Tours,
France, 1919

Chinese
typewriter
produced
by
Shuangge,
with
2,450 characters

Japanese
Hermes
typewriter
SH- typewriter
280,
a
small
machine
with
2,268 characters

typewriter
robotron S 1001
from
VEB
RobotronElektronik at the
GDR, this sample
is owned by the
MEK

3000 1920s Underwood Chinese
typewriter
with typewriter
at
Swedish layout
Deutsches
Technikmuseum

Personal
An Olivetti Studio
typewriter
of 45 Typewriter
Mozaﬀar
ad-Din
Shah Qajar, the
ﬁfth Qajar king of
Persia
(Iran),
made in late 19th
century

See also
Chorded keyboard
Computer keyboard
Duplicating machines
Friden Flexowriter
JOHNNIAC
Letter (alphabet)

Projection keyboard
Teletype Model 33
Typeface
Typescript
Typewriter desk
UNIVAC 1102

References
1. "typewriter (2)". Oxford English Dictionary. Vol 18 (2nd ed.). Oxford University
Press. 1989. p. 789.

2. James W. Cortada (2015). Before the Computer: IBM, NCR, Burroughs, and
Remington Rand and the Industry They Created, 1865–1956 (https://books.google.
com/books?id=dbl9BgAAQBAJ&pg=PT38). Princeton University Press. p. 38.
ISBN 978-1-4008-7276-3. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180626060339/
https://books.google.com/books?id=dbl9BgAAQBAJ&pg=PT38) from the original on
2018-06-26.
3. "Typewriters" (https://web.archive.org/web/20161227181833/http://www.oﬃcemus
eum.com/typewriters.htm). www.oﬃcemuseum.com. Archived from the original (ht
tps://www.oﬃcemuseum.com/typewriters.htm) on December 27, 2016.
4. "Typewriters, Writing a Social History of Urban India" (https://thewire.in/books/withgreat-truth-and-regards-typewriter). The Wire. Retrieved 18 March 2019.
5. Stamp, Jimmy. "Fact of Fiction? The Legend of the QWERTY Keyboard" (https://www.
smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/fact-of-ﬁction-the-legend-of-the-qwerty-keyboard
-49863249/). Smithsonian.
6. "The archives times – March – April 2013 – Lost and found, a 1984 photo revives
those times" (http://www.archives.godrej.com/assets/pdf/The_Archives_Times_Mar_
Apr_2013.pdf) (PDF). Godrej archives. Retrieved 18 March 2019.
7. "From behind the scenes – Godrej Prima and the Stenographers handbook" (http://
www.archives.godrej.com/assets/pdf/Steno's_Handbook.pdf) (PDF).
www.archives.godrej.com. Godrej archives. Retrieved 18 March 2019.
8. Acocella, Joan (April 9, 2007). "The Typing Life: How writers used to write" (https://n
ewyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2007/04/09/070409crbo_books_acocella?currentPa
ge=1). The New Yorker. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20131203011413/ht
tp://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2007/04/09/070409crbo_books_acocell
a?currentPage=1) from the original on December 3, 2013.
9. "Scrittura | Museo dinamico della tecnologia Adriano Olivetti" (http://museocaserta
olivetti.altervista.org/scrittura/). museocasertaolivetti.altervista.org (in Italian).
https://translate.google.pl/translate?
hl=en&sl=it&u=http://museocasertaolivetti.altervista.org/scrittura/&prev=search.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170621081930/http://museocasertaolivett
i.altervista.org/scrittura/) from the original on 2017-06-21. Retrieved 2017-07-21.
10. "Henry Mill Patents" (http://www.todayinsci.com/M/Mill_Henry/MillHenryPatents.ht
m). Todayinsci.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20121128013806/htt
p://www.todayinsci.com/M/Mill_Henry/MillHenryPatents.htm) from the original on
2012-11-28. Retrieved 2012-03-30.
11. "History of Computers and Computing, Birth of the modern computer, The bases of
digital computers, typewriter and computer keyboard" (http://history-computer.co
m/ModernComputer/Basis/keyboard.html). history-computer.com. Archived (https://
web.archive.org/web/20160905195941/http://history-computer.com/ModernCompu
ter/Basis/keyboard.html) from the original on 2016-09-05. Retrieved 2016-09-19.
12. "Italian Inventors and their Inventions" (http://www.yourguidetoitaly.com/italian-inv
entors.html). YourGuideToItaly.com. 2010. Retrieved 2011-01-25.
13. Gianfrancesco Rambelli (1844). Intorno invenzioni e scoperte italiane (http://books.
google.it/books?id=Om_KVDRCK8EC&pg=PA150) (in Italian). Modena: Tipograﬁa
Vincenzi e Rossi. p. 150.
14. William Austin Burt's Typographer. Science Museum. 1829.
15. Utterback, James M. Utterback (1996). Mastering The Dynamics Of Innovation, 2nd
Ed. Harvard Business Press. ISBN 978-0-87584-740-5.
16. "Thurber's Chirographer – Scientiﬁc American" (https://todayinsci.com/Events/Type
writer/Chirographer-SciAm.htm). todayinsci.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20150327043255/http://todayinsci.com/Events/Typewriter/Chirographer-SciA
m.htm) from the original on 2015-03-27. Retrieved 2017-01-20.

17. Adler, Michael (1997). Antique typewriters: from Creed to QWERTY. Atglen, Pa.:
Schiﬀer Pub. ISBN 978-0-7643-0132-2.
18. "Type Writing Machine" (http://cdl.library.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/moa/pageviewer?fram
es=1&coll=moa&view=50&root=%2Fmoa%2Fscia%2Fscia1017%2F&tif=00011.TIF
&cite=http%3A%2F%2Fcdl.library.cornell.edu%2Fcgi-bin%2Fmoa%2Fmoa-cgi%3Fn
otisid%3DABF2204-1017-3). Scientiﬁc American. New. 17 (1). New York. 1867-0706. p. 3. Retrieved 2009-01-14.
19. Hearst Magazines (May 1929). Popular Mechanics (https://books.google.com/book
s?id=wN4DAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA751). Hearst Magazines. p. 751.
20. Mares, G. C. (1909). The History of the Typewriter (https://archive.org/details/in.ern
et.dli.2015.201721). London. p. 230 (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.20
1721/page/n234).
21. "Early Oﬃce Museum" (http://www.oﬃcemuseum.com/typewriters.htm). Archived
(https://web.archive.org/web/20140102201621/http://www.oﬃcemuseum.com/type
writers.htm) from the original on 2 January 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2013.
22. Larson, Erik (2004). The Devil in the White City: A Saga of Magic and Murder at the
Fair that Changed America (https://books.google.com/books?id=kJp22rZDOZQC).
Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 291. ISBN 978-1-4000-7631-4. Archived (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20180626060339/https://books.google.com/books?id=kJp
22rZDOZQC) from the original on 2018-06-26.
23. Hendrickson, Walter B. (1956). "The Three Lives of Frank H. Hall" (https://web.archi
ve.org/web/20100806034158/http://dig.lib.niu.edu/ISHS/ishs-1956autumn/ishs-195
6autumn-271.pdf) (PDF). Journal of the Illinois State Historical Society. University of
Illinois Press. 49 (3). Archived from the original (http://dig.lib.niu.edu/ISHS/ishs-195
6autumn/ishs-1956autumn-271.pdf) (PDF) on 2010-08-06.
24. Anonymous (24 April 2011). "Hall Braille Writer" (https://web.archive.org/web/2012
0427203920/http://www.aph.org/museum/braillewriters/1.html). American Printing
House for the Blind, Inc. Archived from the original (http://www.aph.org/museum/br
aillewriters/1.html) on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 29 February 2012.
25. Otto Burghagen (1898). Die Schreibmaschine. Illustrierte Beschreibung aller
gangbaren Schreibmaschinen nebst gründlicher Anleitung zum Arbeiten auf
sämtlichen Systemen.
26. Dieter Eberwein. Nietzsches Schreibkugel. Ein Blick auf Nietzsches
Schreibmaschinenzeit durch die Restauration der Schreibkugel. EberweinTyposkriptverlag. Schauenburg 2005.
27. Johanne Agerskov (1925). Hvem er Skrivekuglens Opﬁnder?.
28. Records of the Patent and Trademark Oﬃce, Record Group 241. (June 23, 1868).
"Drawing for a Typewriter" (https://www.docsteach.org/documents/document/drawi
ng-for-a-typewriter). docsteach.org.
29. Jocher, Katharine; Bliven, Bruce (1954). "Reviewed work: The Typewriter and the
Men Who Made It., Richard N. Current; the Wonderful Writing Machine., Bruce
Bliven, Jr". Social Forces. 33 (2): 197–198. doi:10.2307/2573562 (https://doi.org/10.
2307%2F2573562). JSTOR 2573562 (https://www.jstor.org/stable/2573562).
30. "SmartBeard" (https://web.archive.org/web/20150102155301/http://smartbeard.co
m/history-of-the-typewriter/). SmartBeard. Archived from the original (https://smart
beard.com/) on January 2, 2015.
31. Schwalbach Tower Clocks (http://www.vintagecatalogs.com/VC/HTM/Item/Schwalba
ch_1906_ARCH.htm), Vintagecatalogs.com
32. Wisconsin Historical Commission (http://www.waymarking.com/waymarks/WM23A6
_FIRST_practical_typewriter) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201601020104
02/http://www.waymarking.com/waymarks/WM23A6_FIRST_practical_typewriter)
2016-01-02 at the Wayback Machine, Waymarking.com

33. "Antique Index Typewriters"
(http://www.oﬃcemuseum.com/typewriters_index.htm). Early Oﬃce Museum.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160702212611/http://www.oﬃcemuseum.
com/typewriters_index.htm) from the original on 2 July 2016. Retrieved 13 March
2017.
34. "The Mignon 2" (http://www.typewritermuseum.org/collection/brands/index.php3?
machine=indexmignon2&cat=is). The Virtual Typewriter Museum. Archived (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20161003035122/http://www.typewritermuseum.org/collec
tion/brands/index.php3?machine=indexmignon2&cat=is) from the original on 3
October 2016. Retrieved 13 March 2017.
35. "The Remington Type-Writing Machine". Nature. 14 (342): 43–44. 1876.
Bibcode:1876Natur..14...43. (https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1876Natur..14...4
3.). doi:10.1038/014043a0 (https://doi.org/10.1038%2F014043a0).
36. Robert, Paul. "Daugherty" (http://www.typewritermuseum.org/collection/index.php
3?machine=daugh&cat=kf#). Collection. The Virtual Typewriter Museum (http://ww
w.typewritermuseum.org/index.html). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110
729132951/http://www.typewritermuseum.org/collection/index.php3?machine=dau
gh&cat=kf) from the original on July 29, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2012. External link
in |publisher= (help)
37. Seaver, Alan (2011). "Daugherty Visible" (https://web.archive.org/web/2013051121
1636/http://machinesoﬂovinggrace.com/ptf/VisDaughertyPittsburg.html). Machines
of Loving Grace website (http://machinesoﬂovinggrace.com/). Alan Seaver.
Archived from the original (http://machinesoﬂovinggrace.com/ptf/VisDaughertyPitts
burg.html) on May 11, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2012. External link in |work= (help)
38. "How to prepare a mimeograph stencil by using a typewriter" (http://www.sil.org/lin
gualinks/literacy/implementaliteracyprogram/howtoprepareamimeographstencil2.h
tm). LinguaLinks Library. SIL International. Archived (https://archive.today/2012101
6144524/http://www.sil.org/lingualinks/literacy/implementaliteracyprogram/howtop
repareamimeographstencil2.htm) from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved
2011-05-10.
39. OOcities.com (https://web.archive.org/web/20091028054256/http://www.geocities.
com/wbd641/UndNoiselessAd.html) Reproduction of advertisement for Noiseless
typewriters, with list of models and diagram of typebar mechanism
40. Newyorker.com (https://newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2007/04/09/070409crbo_
books_acocella?currentPage=all) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20070929
165400/http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2007/04/09/070409crbo_book
s_acocella?currentPage=all) 2007-09-29 at the Wayback Machine Acocella, Joan,
"The Typing Life: How writers used to write", The New Yorker, April 9, 2007, a
review of The Iron Whim: A Fragmented History of Typewriting (Cornell) 2007, by
Darren Wershler-Henry
41. "Bert Kerschbaumer, "The Cahill Electrical Typewriters," ETCetera No. 100
(December 2012)" (http://etconline.org/backissues/ETC100.pdf) (PDF). Archived (ht
tps://web.archive.org/web/20160730133043/http://etconline.org/backissues/ETC10
0.pdf) (PDF) from the original on 2016-07-30.
42. "P. Robert Aubert, "The Last Service Call," ETCetera No. 33(December 1995)" (htt
p://etconline.org/backissues/ETC033.pdf) (PDF). Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20160730133642/http://etconline.org/backissues/ETC033.pdf) (PDF) from the
original on 2016-07-30.

43. "U.S. Patent 1,286,351 ﬁled in May, 1910, and issued in December, 1918" (http://p
atimg2.uspto.gov/.piw?Docid=01286351&homeurl=http%3A%2F%2Fpatft.uspto.go
v%2Fnetacgi%2Fnph-Parser%3FSect1%3DPTO1%2526Sect2%3DHITOFF%2526d%
3DPALL%2526p%3D1%2526u%3D%25252Fnetahtml%25252FPTO%25252Fsrchnu
m.htm%2526r%3D1%2526f%3DG%2526l%3D50%2526s1%3D1286351.PN.%2526
OS%3DPN%2F1286351%2526RS%3DPN%2F1286351&PageNum=&Rtype=&Sectio
nNum=&idkey=NONE&Input=View+ﬁrst+page). Archived (https://web.archive.org/
web/20161225235913/http://patimg2.uspto.gov/.piw?Docid=01286351&homeurl=
http%3A%2F%2Fpatft.uspto.gov%2Fnetacgi%2Fnph-Parser%3FSect1%3DPTO1%25
26Sect2%3DHITOFF%2526d%3DPALL%2526p%3D1%2526u%3D%25252Fnetahtm
l%25252FPTO%25252Fsrchnum.htm%2526r%3D1%2526f%3DG%2526l%3D50%25
26s1%3D1286351.PN.%2526OS%3DPN%2F1286351%2526RS%3DPN%2F1286351
&PageNum=&Rtype=&SectionNum=&idkey=NONE&Input=View+ﬁrst+page) from
the original on 2016-12-25. Retrieved 2011-09-16.
44. Colin Hempstead, William E. Worthington (2005). Encyclopedia of 20th Century
Technology (https://books.google.com/books?id=0wkIlnNjDWcC&pg=PA605).
Routledge. p. 605. ISBN 978-1-57958-464-1.
45. "IBM Electric Typewriter Model 01" (http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/vin
tage/vintage_4506VV2240.html). 03.ibm.com. 23 January 2003. Archived (https://w
eb.archive.org/web/20130526135454/http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/
vintage/vintage_4506VV2240.html) from the original on 2013-05-26. Retrieved
2013-09-12.
46. "Changing the Type of Typewriter Made Easy" (https://books.google.com/books?id=
4OIDAAAAMBAJ&pg=-PA83). Popular Mechanics. Hearst Magazines: 83. July 1931.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20180626060339/https://books.google.com/
books?id=4OIDAAAAMBAJ&pg=-PA83) from the original on 2018-06-26.
47. "IBM Typewriter Milestones" (https://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/modelb/
modelb_milestone.html). IBM Archives. 23 January 2003. Archived (https://web.arc
hive.org/web/20170627172904/http://www-03.ibm.com/ibm/history/exhibits/model
b/modelb_milestone.html) from the original on 2017-06-27.
48. IBM (7 March 2012). "The Selectric Typewriter" (https://www.ibm.com/ibm/history/i
bm100/us/en/icons/selectric/). Icons of Progress. Retrieved 20 January 2020.
49. Ellen, David (2005). Scientiﬁc Examination of Documents. CRC Press. pp. 106–107.
ISBN 978-0-8493-3925-7.
50. Wershler-Henry, Darren (2005). The Iron Whim: A Fragmented History of
Typewriting (https://archive.org/details/ironwhim00wers/page/254). Ithica and
London: Cornell University Press. p. 254 (https://archive.org/details/ironwhim00wer
s/page/254). ISBN 978-0-8014-4586-6.
51. "The History of Smith Corona | Since 1877 to Present" (http://www.smithcorona.co
m/history.html). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170322134218/http://ww
w.smithcorona.com/history.html) from the original on 2017-03-22. Retrieved
2017-03-12.
52. Giuseppe Silmo (2007). M.P.S. Macchine per scrivere Olivetti e non solo.
Fondazione Natale Capellaro. p. 74.
53. US patent 4620808 (https://worldwide.espacenet.com/textdoc?DB=EPODOC&IDX=
US4620808), "Display typewriter", issued 1986-11-04
54. "Smith-Corona" (http://mindmachine.co.uk/products/04_Manuf_Smith-Corona_01.ht
ml#PWP-series). Mindmachine.co.uk. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130
528120612/http://mindmachine.co.uk/products/04_Manuf_Smith-Corona_01.html#
PWP-series) from the original on 2013-05-28. Retrieved 2013-09-12.

55. Keene, Cindy Atoji (2009-02-01). "Typewriters ring on in the fringes" (https://www.b
oston.com/jobs/news/articles/2009/02/01/typewriters_ring_on_in_the_fringes/). The
Boston Globe. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130826014156/http://www.
boston.com/jobs/news/articles/2009/02/01/typewriters_ring_on_in_the_fringes/)
from the original on 2013-08-26.
56. Typewrite & Wrong: NYPD 'Wastes' $1M on Relics (http://www.nypost.com/seven/07
132009/news/regionalnews/typewrite__wrong_178919.htm) Archived (https://web.a
rchive.org/web/20090905051538/http://www.nypost.com/seven/07132009/news/re
gionalnews/typewrite__wrong_178919.htm) 2009-09-05 at the Wayback Machine,
By Jeremy Olshan, New York Post, July 13, 2009
57. "The death of the typewriter? Don't write it oﬀ yet" (https://web.archive.org/web/20
110503045910/http://www.rnw.nl/english/article/death-typewriter-dont-write-ityet). Radio Netherlands Worldwide. 2011-04-27. Archived from the original (http://
www.rnw.nl/english/article/death-typewriter-dont-write-it-yet) on 2011-05-03.
Retrieved 2012-03-30.
58. "Texas inmates have clear choice in typewriters" (http://ﬁxed-mobile-convergence.t
mcnet.com/news/2011/06/15/5574540.htm). Fixed-mobileconvergence.tmcnet.com. 2011-06-15. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2012
0426011651/http://ﬁxed-mobile-convergence.tmcnet.com/news/2011/06/15/55745
40.htm) from the original on 2012-04-26. Retrieved 2012-03-30.
59. CBC News (April 26, 2011). "World's last typewriter plant stops production" (http://
www.cbc.ca/news/world/story/2011/04/26/typewriter-factory-closing.html).
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20110429015137/http://www.cbc.ca/news/w
orld/story/2011/04/26/typewriter-factory-closing.html) from the original on April 29,
2011. Retrieved April 27, 2011. "A previous version of this story did not clearly
state that Godrej & Boyce appears to be the world's last maker of mechanical
typewriters, which operate solely on human power. Numerous other manufacturers
continue to make several types of electric typewriters."
60. "Wite Out? World's 'last typewriter factory' apparently isn't" (http://content.usatoda
y.com/communities/ondeadline/post/2011/04/worlds-last-typewriter-factory-oﬀers-it
-ﬁnal-500-machines-for-sale/1). Content.usatoday.com. 2011-04-26. Archived (http
s://archive.today/20120707111148/http://content.usatoday.com/communities/onde
adline/post/2011/04/worlds-last-typewriter-factory-oﬀers-it-ﬁnal-500-machines-for-s
ale/1) from the original on 2012-07-07. Retrieved 2012-03-30.
61. Romenesko, Jim (2011-04-26). "Reports of typewriter's death are premature" (http
s://web.archive.org/web/20110904024830/http://www.poynter.org/latest-news/rom
enesko/129512/reports-of-typewriters-death-are-premature/). Poynter.org. Archived
from the original (http://www.poynter.org/latest-news/romenesko/129512/reports-of
-typewriters-death-are-premature/) on 2011-09-04. Retrieved 2012-03-30.
62. Memmott, Mark (2011-04-26). "Has The Last Typewriter Factory Closed? Not
Really" (https://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2011/04/26/135740246/has-the-last
-typewriter-factory-closed-not-really). Npr.org. Archived (https://web.archive.org/we
b/20120313204452/http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2011/04/26/135740246/h
as-the-last-typewriter-factory-closed-not-really) from the original on 2012-03-13.
Retrieved 2012-03-30.
63. Rohrlich, Justin (2011-04-25). "Contrary to Reports, Typewriter Industry "Far From
Dead" " (http://www.minyanville.com/mvpremium/2011/04/25/contrary-to-reports-t
ypewriter-industry). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20160224204135/http://
www.minyanville.com/mvpremium/2011/04/25/contrary-to-reports-typewriter-indus
try/) from the original on 2016-02-24.

64. "UK's 'last typewriter' produced" (https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20391538). BBC.
2012-11-20. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20131219184806/http://www.b
bc.co.uk/news/uk-20391538) from the original on 2013-12-19. Retrieved
2013-09-12.
65. "Ainda se fabricam máquinas de escrever? (Are typewriters still manufactured?)"
(http://mundoestranho.abril.com.br/materia/ainda-se-fabricam-maquinas-de-escrev
er). Mundoestranho.abril.com.br. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201204250
25818/http://mundoestranho.abril.com.br/materia/ainda-se-fabricam-maquinas-deescrever) from the original on 2012-04-25. Retrieved 2012-03-30.
66. Richard Polt, The Typewriter Revolution: A Typist's Companion for the 21st Century
(Woodstock, VT: Countryman Press, 2015)
67. "How to correct a mimeograph stencil" (http://www.sil.org/lingualinks/literacy/imple
mentaliteracyprogram/howtocorrectamimeographstencil.htm). LinguaLinks Library.
SIL International. Archived (https://archive.today/20121016144730/http://www.sil.o
rg/lingualinks/literacy/implementaliteracyprogram/howtocorrectamimeographstenc
il.htm) from the original on 2012-10-16. Retrieved 2011-05-10.
68. Liebowitz, S. J.; Stephen E. Margolis (1990). "The Fable of the Keys" (http://wwwpu
b.utdallas.edu/~liebowit/keys1.html). Journal of Law & Economics. The University
of Chicago. XXXIII (April 1990): 1. doi:10.1086/467198 (https://doi.org/10.1086%2
F467198). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20080703204106/http://wwwpub.
utdallas.edu/%7Eliebowit/keys1.html) from the original on 2008-07-03. Retrieved
2008-06-18. "This article examines the history, economics, and ergonomics of the
typewriter keyboard. We show that David's version of the history of the market's
rejection of Dvorak does not report the true history, and we present evidence that
the continued use of Qwerty is eﬃcient given the current understanding of
keyboard design."
69. Kroemer, Karl H.E (2014), "Keyboards and keying an annotated bibliography of the
literature from 1878 to 1999", Universal Access in the Information Society, 1 (2):
99–160, doi:10.1007/s102090100012 (https://doi.org/10.1007%2Fs102090100012)
70. David, P. A. (1986). "Understanding the Economics of QWERTY: the Necessity of
History". In Parker, William N., Economic History and the Modern Economist. Basil
Blackwell, New York and Oxford.
71. "Consider QWERTY" (https://web.archive.org/web/20080515013027/http://home.ea
rthlink.net/~dcrehr/whyqwert.html). Archived from the original (http://home.earthli
nk.net/~dcrehr/whyqwert.html) on May 15, 2008. Retrieved 2008-06-18.
"QWERTY's eﬀect, by reducing those annoying clashes, was to speed up typing
rather than slow it down."
72. "Instructions for Using the Blickensderfer Typewriter" (http://library.duke.edu/digital
collections/eaa_A0562/). Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20140221053745/h
ttp://library.duke.edu/digitalcollections/eaa_A0562/) from the original on 2014-0221. Retrieved 2014-01-03.
73. Upper and Lower Case Magazine. "U&lc Online Issue 41.1.1: Top Ten Type Crimes"
(http://www.itcfonts.com/Ulc/4111/TopTenTypeCrimes.htm). Retrieved 23 March
2010.
74. Williams, Robin (2003). The Mac is not a typewriter: A style manual for creating
professional-level type on your Macintosh (2nd ed.). Berkeley, California: Peachpit
Press. ISBN 978-0-201-78263-9.
75. Felici, James (2003). The Complete Manual of Typography: A Guide to Setting
Perfect Type. Berkeley, California: Peachpit Press. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-321-12730-3.

76. Rosendorf, Theodore (2009). The Typographic Desk Reference (https://archive.org/d
etails/typographicdeskr0000rose) (1st ed.). New Castle, Delaware. ISBN 978-158456-231-3.; Upper and Lower Case Magazine. "U&lc Online Issue 41.1.1: Top Ten
Type Crimes" (http://www.itcfonts.com/Ulc/4111/TopTenTypeCrimes.htm). Retrieved
23 March 2010.; Strizver, Ilene (2010). Type Rules: The Designer's Guide to
Professional Typography (3rd ed.). New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. p. 199.
ISBN 978-0-470-54251-4.. Strizver states that "When available, true primes should
be used for measurements, but typewriter quotes (not smart quotes) have become
the accepted practice in digital typography."
77. Regents of the University of Minnesota (18 July 2007). "University of Minnesota
Style Manual" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090117122230/http://www1.umn.ed
u/urelate/style/copyprep.html). University of Minnesota. Regents of the University
of Minnesota. Archived from the original (http://www1.umn.edu/urelate/style/copyp
rep.html#Anchor-Copy-47857) on January 17, 2009. Retrieved 12 May 2010. This
topic is discussed under "Creating Professional-looking Text."; Williams 2003. pps.
31, 33. Another example of the limitation of the typewriter in regard to underlining,
was the necessity to underline the titles of books and stand-alone works in
Bibliographies—works that would otherwise have been italicized, if that capability
existed on the typewriter.
78. Truss, Lynn (2004). Eats, Shoot & Leaves: The Zero Tolerance Approach to
Punctuation. New York: Gotham Books. p. 135. ISBN 978-1-59240-087-4.
79. "1876 Sholes, Gidden, Soule invention" (https://web.archive.org/web/20121214222
817/http://library.thinkquest.org/04oct/00451/typewriter.htm). Archived from the
original (http://library.thinkquest.org/04oct/00451/typewriter.htm) on 14 December
2012. Retrieved 29 December 2012.
80. Boyer, Kate, and Kim England. "Gender, Work and Technology in the Information
Workplace: From Typewriters to ATMs." Social & Cultural Geography 9.3 (2008):
241–56. Web.
81. Waller, Robert A. "WOMEN AND THE TYPEWRITER DURING THE FIRST FIFTY YEARS,
1873–1923". Studies in Popular Culture 9.1 (1986): 39–50. Web.
82. "Decree on the Press" (http://soviethistory.msu.edu/1917-2/organs-of-the-press/org
ans-of-the-press-texts/decree-on-the-press/). Seventeen Moments in Soviet History.
2015-08-25. Retrieved 2019-12-09.
83. KULA: knowledge creation, dissemination, and preservation studies (https://kula.uvi
c.ca/). 2017. OCLC 1126556820 (https://www.worldcat.org/oclc/1126556820).
84. Bolintineanu, Alexandra; Thirugnanasampanthan, Jaya (2018-11-29). "The
Typewriter Under the Bed: Introducing Digital Humanities through Banned Books
and Endangered Knowledge". KULA: Knowledge Creation, Dissemination, and
Preservation Studies. 2 (1): 22. doi:10.5334/kula.30 (https://doi.org/10.5334%2Fkul
a.30). ISSN 2398-4112 (https://www.worldcat.org/issn/2398-4112).
85. Aleeva, Ekaterina (2017-07-10). "Samizdat: How did people in the Soviet Union
circumvent state censorship" (https://www.rbth.com/arts/literature/2017/07/10/sam
izdat_797635). www.rbth.com. Retrieved 2019-12-09.
86. "The First Typewriter" (https://web.archive.org/web/20090201140007/http://home.e
arthlink.net/~dcrehr/ﬁrsttw.html). Rehr, Darryl. Archived from the original (http://ho
me.earthlink.net/~dcrehr/ﬁrsttw.html) on 2009-02-01. Retrieved 2009-02-16.
87. Carpenter, Humphrey (1978). J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography, Unwin Paperbacks
p.207. ISBN 0 04 928039 2
88. Foster, Edward H., Richard Brautigan, Twayne 1983.

89. A Bruin Birthday Tribute To Ray Bradbury Tweet (August 22, 2010). "First Spark: Ray
Bradbury Turns 90; The Universe and UCLA Academy Celebrate" (https://web.archiv
e.org/web/20111005161805/http://www.spotlight.ucla.edu/ray-bradbury/).
Spotlight.ucla.edu. Archived from the original (http://www.spotlight.ucla.edu/ray-br
adbury/) on October 5, 2011. Retrieved September 30, 2011.
90. Hanks, Tom. "I Am TOM. I Like to TYPE. Hear That?" (https://www.nytimes.com/201
3/08/04/opinion/sunday/i-am-tom-i-like-to-type-hear-that.html). Retrieved March 9,
2020.
91. Revolution, The Typewriter. "A Typist's Companion for the 21st Century" (https://typ
ewriterrevolution.com/). The Typewriter Revolution.
92. "Blog archive" (https://web.archive.org/web/20071021032407/http://www.williamgi
bsonbooks.com/blog/2006_10_01_archive.asp). Archived from the original (http://w
ww.williamgibsonbooks.com/blog/2006_10_01_archive.asp) on 2007-10-21.
Retrieved 2008-10-23.
93. "Harlan Ellison Webderland: Interview" (http://harlanellison.com/interview.htm).
Harlanellison.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120308110553/http://
www.harlanellison.com/interview.htm) from the original on 2012-03-08. Retrieved
2012-03-30.
94. Kennedy, Randy (2009-12-04). "Cormac McCarthy's Typewriter Brings $254,500 at
Auction – ArtsBeat Blog – NYTimes.com" (http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/1
2/04/cormac-mccarthys-typewriter-brings-254500-at-auction/).
Artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/201105281535
49/http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/12/04/cormac-mccarthys-typewriter-bri
ngs-254500-at-auction/) from the original on 2011-05-28. Retrieved 2010-01-11.
95. Patricia Cohen (November 30, 2009). "No Country for Old Typewriters: A Well-Used
One Heads to Auction" (https://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/01/books/01typewriter.h
tml?_r=1&scp=1&sq=cohen%20mccarthy&st=cse). New York Times. Archived (htt
ps://web.archive.org/web/20140904124940/http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/01/b
ooks/01typewriter.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=cohen%20mccarthy&st=cse) from the
original on September 4, 2014.
96. "Why typewriters beat computers" (http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/7427237.stm). BBC
News. 2008-05-30. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20170804050059/http://
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/7427237.stm) from the original on 2017-08-04.
97. "IMSLP16532-Satie_-_Parade_(orch._score).pdf" (http://conquest.imslp.info/ﬁles/img
lnks/usimg/d/db/IMSLP16532-Satie_-_Parade_(orch._score).pdf) (PDF). International
Music Score Library Project.
98. Hurley, Sean. "Boston Orchestra Makes Typewriters Sing" (https://www.npr.org/tem
plates/story/story.php?storyId=95578403). NPR Music. National Public Radio.
Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120308223426/http://www.npr.org/templa
tes/story/story.php?storyId=95578403) from the original on 2012-03-08. Retrieved
2012-03-16.
99. "The Boston Typewriter Orchestra" (http://www.bostontypewriterorchestra.com/).
Wordpress. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20120404062611/http://www.bo
stontypewriterorchestra.com/) from the original on 2012-04-04. Retrieved
2012-03-16.
00. "Becoming Typewriter : Ryu Hankil : Free Download & Streaming : Internet Archive"
(https://archive.org/details/BecomingTypewriter). 2001-03-10. Retrieved
2013-09-12.
01. "Populaire Bande Annonce Oﬃcielle" (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5p6xo2W
-DHs). YouTube. Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/20130724090127/http://ww
w.youtube.com/watch?v=5p6xo2W-DHs) from the original on 2013-07-24.
Retrieved 2013-09-12.

02. Kelly, Mary W. (2006). "Typewriters". Scientiﬁc Examination of Questioned
Documents, Second Edition (Forensic and Police Science Series) (2nd ed.). Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press. pp. 177–189. ISBN 978-0-8493-2044-6.
03. Haas, Josef. (1972), "ATLAS der Schreibmaschinenschrift, PICA".
04. Haas, Josef and Bernhard Haas. (1985), "ATLAS der Schreibmaschinenschrift, NonPICA".
05. Bouﬀard, P.D. (1992), A PC-Based Typewriter Typestyle Classiﬁcation System
Standard, presented at the American Academy of Forensic Sciences meeting, New
Orleans, LA.
06. Hodgins, Cpl. J.H. (January 1963). "A Punchcard System for Identiﬁcation of
Typescript". Journal of Forensic Sciences. 8 (1): 68–81.
07. Interpol (1969) "System for Identiﬁcation of Typewriter Makes Using the Card
Index", ICPO-Interpol
08. Crown, David A. (March 1967). "Landmarks in Typewriting Identiﬁcation" (https://sc
holarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5434&context=
jclc). Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science. 58 (1): 105–111.
doi:10.2307/1141378 (https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1141378). JSTOR 1141378 (http
s://www.jstor.org/stable/1141378). "The earliest known reference to the
identiﬁcation potential of typewriting, curiously enough, appears in 'A Case of
Identity', a Sherlock Holmes story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle..."
09. Hagan, William E. (1894). "Chapter VIII". Disputed Handwriting (https://archive.org/
details/disputedhandwrit00haga). Albany, NY: Banks & Brothers. p. 203 (https://arc
hive.org/details/disputedhandwrit00haga/page/203).
10. Osborn, Albert S. (1908). "Typewriting as Evidence". Rochester, NY: The Genesee
Press: 23.
11. Osborn, Albert S. (1973) [1929]. "Questioned Typewriting". Questioned Documents
(2nd ed.). Montclair, NJ: Patterson Smith. p. 1042. ISBN 978-0-87585-207-2.
12. ASTM International (http://www.astm.org/) Archived (https://web.archive.org/web/2
0060331053643/http://www.astm.org/) 2006-03-31 at the Wayback Machine, These
guides are under the jurisdiction of ASTM Committee E30 on Forensic Sciences and
the direct responsibility of Subcommittee E30.02 on Questioned Documents.
Copies of ASTM Standards can be obtained directly from ASTM International.
13. Betea, Lavinia (February 13, 2009). "La Miliţie cu maşina de scris" (https://web.arch
ive.org/web/20150904043133/http://jurnalul.ro/scinteia/special/la-militie-cu-masina
-de-scris-319045.html) (in Romanian). jurnalul.ro. Archived from the original (http://
jurnalul.ro/scinteia/special/la-militie-cu-masina-de-scris-319045.html) on
September 4, 2015. Retrieved August 24, 2014.

Patents
US79265 (https://www.google.com/patents/US79265) – Improvement in TypeWriting Machines (the patent that laid the basis for the Sholes & Glidden Type
Writer)
US349026 (https://www.google.com/patents/US349026) – typewriter ribbon, by
George K. Anderson of Memphis, Tennessee.

Further reading
Adler, M.H. (1973). The Writing Machine: A History of the Typewriter. Allen and
Unwin.

Beeching, Wilfred A. (1974). Century of the Typewriter. St. Martin's Press. pp. 276
Beeching was the Director of the British Typewriter Museum.

External links
The Eclectisaurus online Museum of Typewriters by manufacturers from Adler to
Voss. (http://www.eclectisaurus.com/tmtypewritermuseum.html)
Antique Typewriters, a look at the Martin Howard Collection (http://www.antiquetyp
ewriters.com/)
Most Deﬁnitely My Type (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2y3HK9yTqYo) Video
showcasing historical typewriters, with soundtrack by Boston Typewriter Orchestra
Oliveira Typewriter (em português) (http://www.maquinasantigasdeescrever.com.b
r/historia.html)
Antique Typewriter Collecting, History & Resources for the Collector (http://www.typ
ewritercollector.com/)
Early Typewriter Collectors' Association (https://web.archive.org/web/20090126014
136/http://site.xavier.edu/polt/typewriters/etc.html)
The Classic Typewriter Page (http://site.xavier.edu/polt/typewriters/)
Robert, Paul (2001). "The Virtual Typewriter Museum" (http://www.typewritermuseu
m.org/index.html).
Mr. Martin's Typewriter Museum (http://www.mrmartinweb.com/type.htm)
The Portable Typewriter Reference Site (https://web.archive.org/web/20091028022
753/http://www.geocities.com/wbd641/PortablesIndex.html)
Typewriter: Free Minimal Text Editing Software the Behaves like a Typewriter (http://
www.lifehackingmovie.com/2009/05/18/typewriter-minimal-text-editor-freeware/)
Swiss typpewriter museum (http://perrier-sa.ch/musee/)
Peter Mitterhofer typewriters Museum in Parcines (South Tyrol – Italy) (http://www.s
chreibmaschinenmuseum.com/en/)

Revival
Richard Polt, The Typewriter Revolution: A Typist's Companion for the 21st Century
(http://typewriterrevolution.com/)
Ding, click clack -- typewriter is back (http://qctimes.com/news/opinion/editorial/col
umnists/bill-wundram/article_03dd1536-4423-11de-a7be-001cc4c002e0.html)—
Quad-City Times, May 18, 2009
Typewriters experience a comeback – UPI.com (http://www.upi.com/Odd_News/201
1/12/19/Typewriters-experience-a-comeback/UPI-30661324327372/)—United Press
International, Dec. 19, 2011
Documentary Film -- The Typewriter (In the 21st Century) (http://typewritermovie.c
om/)—2012
Kremlin returns to typewriters to avoid computer leaks (https://www.telegraph.co.u
k/news/worldnews/europe/russia/10173645/Kremlin-returns-to-typewriters-to-avoid
-computer-leaks.html)—The Daily Telegraph, July 11, 2013
Germany 'may revert to typewriters' to counter hi-tech espionage (https://www.the
guardian.com/world/2014/jul/15/germany-typewriters-espionage-nsa-spying-surveil
lance?CMP=twt_gu)—The Guardian, July 15, 2014

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Typewriter&oldid=965410152"

This page was last edited on 1 July 2020, at 04:57 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may
apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered
trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-proﬁt organization.

