Dark, cold and whipped by supersonic winds, ice giant Neptune is
the eighth and most distant planet in our solar system.
More than 30 times as far from the Sun as Earth,
Neptune is the only planet in our solar system not

The Latest

visible to the naked eye and the first predicted by
mathematics before its discovery. In 2011 Neptune
completed its first 165-year orbit since its discovery

Tiny Neptune Moon May
Have Broken from Larger
Moon

in 1846.
NASA's Voyager 2 is the only spacecraft to have visited Neptune
up close. It flew past in 1989 on its way out of the solar system.
Go farther. Explore Neptune In Depth ›

10 Need-to-Know Things About Neptune

1

2

3

GIANT

EIGHTH WANDERER

SHORT DAY, LONG YEAR

Neptune is about four times wider

Neptune orbits our Sun, a star, and is

Neptune takes about 16 hours to

than Earth. If Earth were a large

the eighth planet from the Sun at a

rotate once (a Neptunian day), and

apple, Neptune would be the size of

distance of about 2.8 billion miles

about 165 Earth years to orbit the

a basketball.

(4.5 billion kilometers).

sun (a Neptunian year).

4

5

ICE GIANT

GASSY

Neptune is an ice giant. Most of its

Neptune's atmosphere is made up

mass is a hot, dense fluid of "icy"

mostly of molecular hydrogen,

materials – water, methane and

atomic helium and methane.

GLOBAL COLOR MOSAIC OF TRITON

ammonia – above a small rocky core.

6

7

8

MOONS

FAINT RINGS

ONE VOYAGE THERE

Neptune has 14 known moons which

Neptune has at least five main rings

Voyager 2 is the only spacecraft to

are named after sea gods and

and four more ring arcs, which are

have visited Neptune. No spacecraft

nymphs in Greek mythology.

clumps of dust and debris likely

has orbited this distant planet to

formed by the gravity of a nearby

study it at length and up close.

moon.

9

10

LIFELESS

ONE COOL FACT

Neptune cannot support life as we

Because of dwarf planet Pluto’s

know it.

elliptical orbit, Pluto is sometimes
closer to the Sun (and us) than
Neptune is.

FIRST LOOK: NEPTUNE RINGS

Did You Know?
Neptune is our solar system's windiest world. Winds whip clouds
of frozen methane across the planet at speeds of more than
2,000 km/h (1,200 mph)—close to the top speed of a U.S. Navy
F/A-18 Hornet fighter jet. Earth's most powerful winds hit only
about 400 km/h (250 mph).

NASA Dryden F/A-18 #852 mission support aircraft in flight. Image Credit: NASA Photo / Lori Losey

Pop Culture
Even though Neptune is the farthest planet from our Sun, it's a
frequent stop in pop culture and fiction. The planet served as the
backdrop for the 1997 science fiction horror film Event Horizon,
while in the cartoon series Futurama, the character Robot Santa
Claus has his home base on Neptune's north pole. Dr. Who fans
will remember that an episode entitled "Sleep No More" is set on

a space station orbiting Neptune. And in the Star Trek: Enterprise
pilot episode, "Broken Bow," viewers learn that at warp 4.5
speed, it is possible to fly to Neptune and back to Earth in six
minutes

Kid-Friendly Neptune
Neptune is dark, cold, and very windy. It's the last of the
planets in our solar system. It's more than 30 times as far
from the Sun as Earth is.
Neptune is very similar to Uranus. It's made of a thick
soup of water, ammonia, and methane over an Earthsized solid center. Its atmosphere is made of hydrogen,
helium, and methane. The methane gives Neptune the
same blue color as Uranus.
Neptune has six rings, but they're very hard to see.
Visit NASA Space Place for more kid-friendly facts.
NASA Space Place: All About Neptune ›

Resources
NASA Planetary Photojournal: Neptune
National Space Science Data Center Photo Gallery: Neptune

Page Updated: February 21, 2019

This site is maintained by the Planetary Science Communications team at
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.
Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: Dr. Lori Glaze
NASA Official: Kristen Erickson
Project Lead / Producer: Phillips Davis
Social Media Lead: Bill Dunford

