The Latest
Jan. 31, 2019: A Japanese research group has identified a giant
streak structure among the clouds covering Venus based on
observation from the spacecraft Akatsuki.
The team also revealed the origins of this structure
using large-scale climate simulations. The group was
led by Project Assistant Professor Hiroki Kashimura
(Kobe University, Graduate School of Science) and
these findings were published on January 9 in

Nature Communications.
Second planet from the Sun and our closest
planetary neighbor, Venus is similar in structure and
size to Earth, but it is now a very different world.

Credit: JAXA

Venus spins slowly in the opposite direction most
planets do. Its thick atmosphere traps heat in a runaway
greenhouse effect, making it the hottest planet in our solar
system—with surface temperatures hot enough to melt lead.
Glimpses below the clouds reveal volcanoes and deformed
mountains. Explore Venus ›

10 Need-to-Know Things About Venus

1

2

3

EARTH-SIZED

SECOND ROCK

A DAY LONGER THAN A YEAR

If the sun were as tall as a typical

Venus orbits our Sun, a star. Venus is

One day on Venus lasts 243 Earth

front door, the Earth and Venus

the second closest planet to the sun

days because Venus spins

would each be about the size of a

at a distance of about 67 million

backwards, with its sun rising in the

nickel.

miles (108 million km).

west and setting in the east.

4

5

DIVERSE TERRAIN

MOONLESS AND RINGLESS

Venus' solid surface is a volcanic

Venus has no moons and no rings.

landscape covered with extensive
plains featuring high volcanic

CHASING CLOUDS ON VENUS

mountains and vast ridged plateaus.

6

7

8

GREENHOUSE EFFECT

WATER ON VENUS

MANY VISITORS

The planet’s surface temperature is

Many scientists believe water once

More than 40 spacecraft have

about 900 degrees Fahrenheit (465

existed on the surface. Future Venus

explored Venus. The ‘90s Magellan

degrees Celsius)—hot enough to

explorers will search for evidence of

mission mapped the planet's surface

melt lead.

an ancient ocean.

and Akatsuki is currently orbiting
Venus.

9

10

LIFE ON VENUS

SUPER ROTATING ATMOSPHERE

Venus’ extreme temperatures and

While the surface rotates slowly, the

acidic clouds make it an unlikely

winds blow at hurricane force,

place for life as we know it.

sending clouds completely around
the planet every five days.

Did You Know?

VENUS - 3-D PERSPECTIVE VIEW OF SAPAS
MONS

The Soviet Union’s Venera 13 survived the intense heat and
crushing pressure of Venus’ surface for more than two hours.
Engineers from several nations are currently studying methods to
extend the life of robotic spacecraft in the extreme environment.

Pop Culture
Named after the goddess of love and beauty, Venus has become
nearly synonymous with "woman" in popular culture, as
referenced by the famous relationship guide Men are from Mars,
Women are from Venus. As a solar system locale, Venus was a
popular destination for early 20th century science fiction writers;
before we knew about what lay beneath Venus' mysterious cloud
cover, writers could speculate about a more hospitable planet
and its possible inhabitants.
More recently, Venus has been a backdrop for video games such
as Transhuman Space, Battlezone and Destiny. And in the Disney
animated film The Princess and the Frog, Ray the firefly falls in
love with Venus, "the evening star," as he has mistaken it for
another firefly.

Kid-Friendly Venus
Even though Venus isn't the closest planet to the Sun, it
is still the hottest. It has a thick atmosphere full of the
greenhouse gas carbon dioxide and clouds made of
sulfuric acid. The atmosphere traps heat and keeps
Venus toasty warm. It's so hot on Venus, metals like lead
would be puddles of melted liquid.
Venus looks like a very active planet. It has mountains
and volcanoes. Venus is similar in size to Earth. Earth is
just a little bit bigger.
Venus is unusual because it spins the opposite direction
of Earth and most other planets. And its rotation is very
slow.
Visit NASA Space Place for more kid-friendly facts.
NASA Space Place: All About Venus ›

Resources
NASA Planetary Photojournal - Venus
Exploring the Planets - Venus
National Space Science Data Center - Venus

National Space Science Data Center Photo Gallery - Venus

Page Updated: January 31, 2019

This site is maintained by the Planetary Science Communications team at
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.
Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: Dr. Lori Glaze
NASA Official: Kristen Erickson
Project Lead / Producer: Phillips Davis
Social Media Lead: Bill Dunford

