Mars
The Red Planet

The fourth planet from the Sun, Mars is a dusty, cold, desert world
with a very thin atmosphere.

The Latest

This dynamic planet has seasons, polar ice caps and

7 Things to Know About
the Mars 2020
Perseverance Rover
Mission

weather and canyons and extinct volcanoes,
evidence it was once an even more active past.
Mars is one of the most explored bodies in our solar
system, and it's the only planet where we've sent
rovers to roam the alien landscape. NASA currently has three
spacecraft in orbit, one rover and one lander on the surface. India
and ESA also have spacecraft in orbit above Mars. These robotic
explorers have found lots of evidence that Mars was much wetter
and warmer, with a thicker atmosphere, billions of years ago.
NASA plans to send the next-generation Perseverance rover to
Mars this summer.

Mars Perseverance
Launch (UTC): July 22, 2020

00 : 00 : 12 : 22 : 52 : 10
YRS

MOS

DAYS

HRS

MINS

SECS

Go farther. Explore Mars In Depth ›

10 Need-to-Know Things About Mars

1

2

3

SMALL PLANET

FOURTH ROCK

LONGER DAYS

If the Sun were as tall as a typical

Mars orbits our Sun, a star. Mars is

One day on Mars takes a little over

front door, Earth would be the size

the fourth planet from the Sun at an

24 hours. Mars makes a complete

of a dime, and Mars would be about

average distance of about 228

orbit around the Sun (a year in

as big as an aspirin tablet.

million km (142 million miles) or 1.52

Martian time) in 687 Earth days.

AU.

4

5

RUGGED TERRAIN

BRING A SPACESUIT

Mars is a rocky planet. Its solid

Mars has a thin atmosphere made up

surface has been altered by

mostly of carbon dioxide (CO2),

volcanoes, impacts, winds, crustal

argon (Ar), nitrogen (N2), and a small

movement and chemical reactions.

amount of oxygen and water vapor.

6

7

8

TWO MOONS

RINGLESS

MANY MISSIONS

Mars has two moons named Phobos

There are no rings around Mars.

Several missions have visited this

and Deimos.

planet, from flybys and orbiters to
rovers on the surface.The first true

Mars mission success was the
Mariner 4 flyby in 1965.

9

10

TOUGH PLACE FOR LIFE

RUSTY PLANET

At this time, Mars' surface cannot

Mars is known as the Red Planet

support life as we know it. Current

because iron minerals in the Martian

missions are determining Mars' past

soil oxidize, or rust, causing the soil

and future potential for life.

and atmosphere to look red.

Robots Blaze the Trail for Humans on
Mars
NASA's latest robotic mission to the Red Planet, Mars 2020, aims
to help future astronauts brave that inhospitable landscape.

While the science goal of the Mars 2020 rover is to look for signs
of ancient life — it will be the first spacecraft to collect samples of
the Martian surface, caching them in tubes that could be returned
to Earth on a future mission — the vehicle also includes
technology that paves the way for human exploration of Mars.
Robotic explorers, like the Mars 2020 rover, have long served as
pathfinders to get humans into space, to the Moon and,
eventually, the the surface of the Red Planet.
Read More:
NASA's Mars 2020 Will Blaze a Trail — for Humans
NASA's Moon to Mars Strategy
Artemis 1: The first in a series of increasingly complex missions
that will enable human exploration to the Moon and Mars.

Pop Culture
No other planet has captured our collective imagination quite like
Mars.
In the late 1800s when people first observed the canal-like
features on Mars' surface, many speculated that an intelligent
alien species resided there. This led to numerous stories about
Martians, some of whom invade Earth, like in the 1938 radio
drama, The War of the Worlds. According to an enduring urban

legend, many listeners believed the story to be real
news coverage of an invasion, causing widespread
panic.
Countless stories since have taken place on Mars or
explored the possibilities of its Martian inhabitants.
Movies like Total Recall (1990 and 2012) take us to a
terraformed Mars and a struggling colony running
out of air. A Martian colony and Earth have a prickly
relationship in The Expanse television series and
novels.
And in the 2014 novel and and its 2015 movie
adaptation, The Martian, botanist Mark Whatney is
stranded alone on the planet and struggles to
survive until a rescue mission can retrieve him.
This view of rover tracks on Mars is part of
the free destination poster set. Credit: NASA
/ Moore Boeck | › Full size poster and
download options

Kid-Friendly Mars
Mars is a cold desert world. It is half the size of Earth.
Mars is sometimes called the Red Planet. It's red because
of rusty iron in the ground.
Like Earth, Mars has seasons, polar ice caps, volcanoes,
canyons, and weather. It has a very thin atmosphere
made of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and argon.
There are signs of ancient floods on Mars, but now water
mostly exists in icy dirt and thin clouds. On some Martian
hillsides, there is evidence of liquid salty water in the
ground.
Visit NASA SpacePlace for more kid-friendly facts.
NASA Space Place: All About Mars ›

Additional Resources
NASA’s Mars Exploration Program
NASA: Moon to Mars
Mars Trek: Explore the Surface of Mars

Page Updated: October 10, 2019

This site is maintained by the Planetary Science Communications team at
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate.
Director, NASA Planetary Science Division: Dr. Lori Glaze
NASA Official: Kristen Erickson
Project Lead / Producer: Phillips Davis
Social Media Lead: Bill Dunford

